


                                DRACULA





                                DRACULA

                                  _by_

                              Bram Stoker

                        [Illustration: colophon]

                                NEW YORK

                            GROSSET & DUNLAP

                              _Publishers_

      Copyright, 1897, in the United States of America, according
                   to Act of Congress, by Bram Stoker

                        [_All rights reserved._]

                      PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES
                                   AT
               THE COUNTRY LIFE PRESS, GARDEN CITY, N.Y.




                                   TO

                             MY DEAR FRIEND

                               HOMMY-BEG




Contents

CHAPTER I. Jonathan Harker’s Journal
CHAPTER II. Jonathan Harker’s Journal
CHAPTER III. Jonathan Harker’s Journal
CHAPTER IV. Jonathan Harker’s Journal
CHAPTER V. Letters—Lucy and Mina
CHAPTER VI. Mina Murray’s Journal
CHAPTER VII. Cutting from “The Dailygraph,” 8 August
CHAPTER VIII. Mina Murray’s Journal
CHAPTER IX. Mina Murray’s Journal
CHAPTER X. Mina Murray’s Journal
CHAPTER XI. Lucy Westenra’s Diary
CHAPTER XII. Dr. Seward’s Diary
CHAPTER XIII. Dr. Seward’s Diary
CHAPTER XIV. Mina Harker’s Journal
CHAPTER XV. Dr. Seward’s Diary
CHAPTER XVI. Dr. Seward’s Diary
CHAPTER XVII. Dr. Seward’s Diary
CHAPTER XVIII. Dr. Seward’s Diary
CHAPTER XIX. Jonathan Harker’s Journal
CHAPTER XX. Jonathan Harker’s Journal
CHAPTER XXI. Dr. Seward’s Diary
CHAPTER XXII. Jonathan Harker’s Journal
CHAPTER XXIII. Dr. Seward’s Diary
CHAPTER XXIV. Dr. Seward’s Phonograph Diary, spoken by Van Helsing
CHAPTER XXV. Dr. Seward’s Diary
CHAPTER XXVI. Dr. Seward’s Diary
CHAPTER XXVII. Mina Harker’s Journal




DRACULA




CHAPTER I

JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL

(_Kept in shorthand._)


_3 May. Bistritz._--Left Munich at 8:35 P. M., on 1st May, arriving at
Vienna early next morning; should have arrived at 6:46, but train was an
hour late. Buda-Pesth seems a wonderful place, from the glimpse which I
got of it from the train and the little I could walk through the
streets. I feared to go very far from the station, as we had arrived
late and would start as near the correct time as possible. The
impression I had was that we were leaving the West and entering the
East; the most western of splendid bridges over the Danube, which is
here of noble width and depth, took us among the traditions of Turkish
rule.

We left in pretty good time, and came after nightfall to Klausenburgh.
Here I stopped for the night at the Hotel Royale. I had for dinner, or
rather supper, a chicken done up some way with red pepper, which was
very good but thirsty. (_Mem._, get recipe for Mina.) I asked the
waiter, and he said it was called "paprika hendl," and that, as it was a
national dish, I should be able to get it anywhere along the
Carpathians. I found my smattering of German very useful here; indeed, I
don't know how I should be able to get on without it.

Having had some time at my disposal when in London, I had visited the
British Museum, and made search among the books and maps in the library
regarding Transylvania; it had struck me that some foreknowledge of the
country could hardly fail to have some importance in dealing with a
nobleman of that country. I find that the district he named is in the
extreme east of the country, just on the borders of three states,
Transylvania, Moldavia and Bukovina, in the midst of the Carpathian
mountains; one of the wildest and least known portions of Europe. I was
not able to light on any map or work giving the exact locality of the
Castle Dracula, as there are no maps of this country as yet to compare
with our own Ordnance Survey maps; but I found that Bistritz, the post
town named by Count Dracula, is a fairly well-known place. I shall enter
here some of my notes, as they may refresh my memory when I talk over my
travels with Mina.

In the population of Transylvania there are four distinct nationalities:
Saxons in the South, and mixed with them the Wallachs, who are the
descendants of the Dacians; Magyars in the West, and Szekelys in the
East and North. I am going among the latter, who claim to be descended
from Attila and the Huns. This may be so, for when the Magyars conquered
the country in the eleventh century they found the Huns settled in it. I
read that every known superstition in the world is gathered into the
horseshoe of the Carpathians, as if it were the centre of some sort of
imaginative whirlpool; if so my stay may be very interesting. (_Mem._, I
must ask the Count all about them.)

I did not sleep well, though my bed was comfortable enough, for I had
all sorts of queer dreams. There was a dog howling all night under my
window, which may have had something to do with it; or it may have been
the paprika, for I had to drink up all the water in my carafe, and was
still thirsty. Towards morning I slept and was wakened by the continuous
knocking at my door, so I guess I must have been sleeping soundly then.
I had for breakfast more paprika, and a sort of porridge of maize flour
which they said was "mamaliga," and egg-plant stuffed with forcemeat, a
very excellent dish, which they call "impletata." (_Mem._, get recipe
for this also.) I had to hurry breakfast, for the train started a little
before eight, or rather it ought to have done so, for after rushing to
the station at 7:30 I had to sit in the carriage for more than an hour
before we began to move. It seems to me that the further east you go the
more unpunctual are the trains. What ought they to be in China?

All day long we seemed to dawdle through a country which was full of
beauty of every kind. Sometimes we saw little towns or castles on the
top of steep hills such as we see in old missals; sometimes we ran by
rivers and streams which seemed from the wide stony margin on each side
of them to be subject to great floods. It takes a lot of water, and
running strong, to sweep the outside edge of a river clear. At every
station there were groups of people, sometimes crowds, and in all sorts
of attire. Some of them were just like the peasants at home or those I
saw coming through France and Germany, with short jackets and round hats
and home-made trousers; but others were very picturesque. The women
looked pretty, except when you got near them, but they were very clumsy
about the waist. They had all full white sleeves of some kind or other,
and most of them had big belts with a lot of strips of something
fluttering from them like the dresses in a ballet, but of course there
were petticoats under them. The strangest figures we saw were the
Slovaks, who were more barbarian than the rest, with their big cow-boy
hats, great baggy dirty-white trousers, white linen shirts, and enormous
heavy leather belts, nearly a foot wide, all studded over with brass
nails. They wore high boots, with their trousers tucked into them, and
had long black hair and heavy black moustaches. They are very
picturesque, but do not look prepossessing. On the stage they would be
set down at once as some old Oriental band of brigands. They are,
however, I am told, very harmless and rather wanting in natural
self-assertion.

It was on the dark side of twilight when we got to Bistritz, which is a
very interesting old place. Being practically on the frontier--for the
Borgo Pass leads from it into Bukovina--it has had a very stormy
existence, and it certainly shows marks of it. Fifty years ago a series
of great fires took place, which made terrible havoc on five separate
occasions. At the very beginning of the seventeenth century it underwent
a siege of three weeks and lost 13,000 people, the casualties of war
proper being assisted by famine and disease.

Count Dracula had directed me to go to the Golden Krone Hotel, which I
found, to my great delight, to be thoroughly old-fashioned, for of
course I wanted to see all I could of the ways of the country. I was
evidently expected, for when I got near the door I faced a
cheery-looking elderly woman in the usual peasant dress--white
undergarment with long double apron, front, and back, of coloured stuff
fitting almost too tight for modesty. When I came close she bowed and
said, "The Herr Englishman?" "Yes," I said, "Jonathan Harker." She
smiled, and gave some message to an elderly man in white shirt-sleeves,
who had followed her to the door. He went, but immediately returned with
a letter:--

     "My Friend.--Welcome to the Carpathians. I am anxiously expecting
     you. Sleep well to-night. At three to-morrow the diligence will
     start for Bukovina; a place on it is kept for you. At the Borgo
     Pass my carriage will await you and will bring you to me. I trust
     that your journey from London has been a happy one, and that you
     will enjoy your stay in my beautiful land.

"Your friend,

"DRACULA."


_4 May._--I found that my landlord had got a letter from the Count,
directing him to secure the best place on the coach for me; but on
making inquiries as to details he seemed somewhat reticent, and
pretended that he could not understand my German. This could not be
true, because up to then he had understood it perfectly; at least, he
answered my questions exactly as if he did. He and his wife, the old
lady who had received me, looked at each other in a frightened sort of
way. He mumbled out that the money had been sent in a letter, and that
was all he knew. When I asked him if he knew Count Dracula, and could
tell me anything of his castle, both he and his wife crossed themselves,
and, saying that they knew nothing at all, simply refused to speak
further. It was so near the time of starting that I had no time to ask
any one else, for it was all very mysterious and not by any means
comforting.

Just before I was leaving, the old lady came up to my room and said in a
very hysterical way:

"Must you go? Oh! young Herr, must you go?" She was in such an excited
state that she seemed to have lost her grip of what German she knew, and
mixed it all up with some other language which I did not know at all. I
was just able to follow her by asking many questions. When I told her
that I must go at once, and that I was engaged on important business,
she asked again:

"Do you know what day it is?" I answered that it was the fourth of May.
She shook her head as she said again:

"Oh, yes! I know that! I know that, but do you know what day it is?" On
my saying that I did not understand, she went on:

"It is the eve of St. George's Day. Do you not know that to-night, when
the clock strikes midnight, all the evil things in the world will have
full sway? Do you know where you are going, and what you are going to?"
She was in such evident distress that I tried to comfort her, but
without effect. Finally she went down on her knees and implored me not
to go; at least to wait a day or two before starting. It was all very
ridiculous but I did not feel comfortable. However, there was business
to be done, and I could allow nothing to interfere with it. I therefore
tried to raise her up, and said, as gravely as I could, that I thanked
her, but my duty was imperative, and that I must go. She then rose and
dried her eyes, and taking a crucifix from her neck offered it to me. I
did not know what to do, for, as an English Churchman, I have been
taught to regard such things as in some measure idolatrous, and yet it
seemed so ungracious to refuse an old lady meaning so well and in such a
state of mind. She saw, I suppose, the doubt in my face, for she put the
rosary round my neck, and said, "For your mother's sake," and went out
of the room. I am writing up this part of the diary whilst I am waiting
for the coach, which is, of course, late; and the crucifix is still
round my neck. Whether it is the old lady's fear, or the many ghostly
traditions of this place, or the crucifix itself, I do not know, but I
am not feeling nearly as easy in my mind as usual. If this book should
ever reach Mina before I do, let it bring my good-bye. Here comes the
coach!

       *       *       *       *       *

_5 May. The Castle._--The grey of the morning has passed, and the sun is
high over the distant horizon, which seems jagged, whether with trees or
hills I know not, for it is so far off that big things and little are
mixed. I am not sleepy, and, as I am not to be called till I awake,
naturally I write till sleep comes. There are many odd things to put
down, and, lest who reads them may fancy that I dined too well before I
left Bistritz, let me put down my dinner exactly. I dined on what they
called "robber steak"--bits of bacon, onion, and beef, seasoned with red
pepper, and strung on sticks and roasted over the fire, in the simple
style of the London cat's meat! The wine was Golden Mediasch, which
produces a queer sting on the tongue, which is, however, not
disagreeable. I had only a couple of glasses of this, and nothing else.

When I got on the coach the driver had not taken his seat, and I saw him
talking with the landlady. They were evidently talking of me, for every
now and then they looked at me, and some of the people who were sitting
on the bench outside the door--which they call by a name meaning
"word-bearer"--came and listened, and then looked at me, most of them
pityingly. I could hear a lot of words often repeated, queer words, for
there were many nationalities in the crowd; so I quietly got my polyglot
dictionary from my bag and looked them out. I must say they were not
cheering to me, for amongst them were "Ordog"--Satan, "pokol"--hell,
"stregoica"--witch, "vrolok" and "vlkoslak"--both of which mean the same
thing, one being Slovak and the other Servian for something that is
either were-wolf or vampire. (_Mem._, I must ask the Count about these
superstitions)

When we started, the crowd round the inn door, which had by this time
swelled to a considerable size, all made the sign of the cross and
pointed two fingers towards me. With some difficulty I got a
fellow-passenger to tell me what they meant; he would not answer at
first, but on learning that I was English, he explained that it was a
charm or guard against the evil eye. This was not very pleasant for me,
just starting for an unknown place to meet an unknown man; but every one
seemed so kind-hearted, and so sorrowful, and so sympathetic that I
could not but be touched. I shall never forget the last glimpse which I
had of the inn-yard and its crowd of picturesque figures, all crossing
themselves, as they stood round the wide archway, with its background of
rich foliage of oleander and orange trees in green tubs clustered in the
centre of the yard. Then our driver, whose wide linen drawers covered
the whole front of the box-seat--"gotza" they call them--cracked his big
whip over his four small horses, which ran abreast, and we set off on
our journey.

I soon lost sight and recollection of ghostly fears in the beauty of the
scene as we drove along, although had I known the language, or rather
languages, which my fellow-passengers were speaking, I might not have
been able to throw them off so easily. Before us lay a green sloping
land full of forests and woods, with here and there steep hills, crowned
with clumps of trees or with farmhouses, the blank gable end to the
road. There was everywhere a bewildering mass of fruit blossom--apple,
plum, pear, cherry; and as we drove by I could see the green grass under
the trees spangled with the fallen petals. In and out amongst these
green hills of what they call here the "Mittel Land" ran the road,
losing itself as it swept round the grassy curve, or was shut out by the
straggling ends of pine woods, which here and there ran down the
hillsides like tongues of flame. The road was rugged, but still we
seemed to fly over it with a feverish haste. I could not understand then
what the haste meant, but the driver was evidently bent on losing no
time in reaching Borgo Prund. I was told that this road is in summertime
excellent, but that it had not yet been put in order after the winter
snows. In this respect it is different from the general run of roads in
the Carpathians, for it is an old tradition that they are not to be kept
in too good order. Of old the Hospadars would not repair them, lest the
Turk should think that they were preparing to bring in foreign troops,
and so hasten the war which was always really at loading point.

Beyond the green swelling hills of the Mittel Land rose mighty slopes
of forest up to the lofty steeps of the Carpathians themselves. Right
and left of us they towered, with the afternoon sun falling full upon
them and bringing out all the glorious colours of this beautiful range,
deep blue and purple in the shadows of the peaks, green and brown where
grass and rock mingled, and an endless perspective of jagged rock and
pointed crags, till these were themselves lost in the distance, where
the snowy peaks rose grandly. Here and there seemed mighty rifts in the
mountains, through which, as the sun began to sink, we saw now and again
the white gleam of falling water. One of my companions touched my arm as
we swept round the base of a hill and opened up the lofty, snow-covered
peak of a mountain, which seemed, as we wound on our serpentine way, to
be right before us:--

"Look! Isten szek!"--"God's seat!"--and he crossed himself reverently.

As we wound on our endless way, and the sun sank lower and lower behind
us, the shadows of the evening began to creep round us. This was
emphasised by the fact that the snowy mountain-top still held the
sunset, and seemed to glow out with a delicate cool pink. Here and there
we passed Cszeks and Slovaks, all in picturesque attire, but I noticed
that goitre was painfully prevalent. By the roadside were many crosses,
and as we swept by, my companions all crossed themselves. Here and there
was a peasant man or woman kneeling before a shrine, who did not even
turn round as we approached, but seemed in the self-surrender of
devotion to have neither eyes nor ears for the outer world. There were
many things new to me: for instance, hay-ricks in the trees, and here
and there very beautiful masses of weeping birch, their white stems
shining like silver through the delicate green of the leaves. Now and
again we passed a leiter-wagon--the ordinary peasant's cart--with its
long, snake-like vertebra, calculated to suit the inequalities of the
road. On this were sure to be seated quite a group of home-coming
peasants, the Cszeks with their white, and the Slovaks with their
coloured, sheepskins, the latter carrying lance-fashion their long
staves, with axe at end. As the evening fell it began to get very cold,
and the growing twilight seemed to merge into one dark mistiness the
gloom of the trees, oak, beech, and pine, though in the valleys which
ran deep between the spurs of the hills, as we ascended through the
Pass, the dark firs stood out here and there against the background of
late-lying snow. Sometimes, as the road was cut through the pine woods
that seemed in the darkness to be closing down upon us, great masses of
greyness, which here and there bestrewed the trees, produced a
peculiarly weird and solemn effect, which carried on the thoughts and
grim fancies engendered earlier in the evening, when the falling sunset
threw into strange relief the ghost-like clouds which amongst the
Carpathians seem to wind ceaselessly through the valleys. Sometimes the
hills were so steep that, despite our driver's haste, the horses could
only go slowly. I wished to get down and walk up them, as we do at home,
but the driver would not hear of it. "No, no," he said; "you must not
walk here; the dogs are too fierce"; and then he added, with what he
evidently meant for grim pleasantry--for he looked round to catch the
approving smile of the rest--"and you may have enough of such matters
before you go to sleep." The only stop he would make was a moment's
pause to light his lamps.

When it grew dark there seemed to be some excitement amongst the
passengers, and they kept speaking to him, one after the other, as
though urging him to further speed. He lashed the horses unmercifully
with his long whip, and with wild cries of encouragement urged them on
to further exertions. Then through the darkness I could see a sort of
patch of grey light ahead of us, as though there were a cleft in the
hills. The excitement of the passengers grew greater; the crazy coach
rocked on its great leather springs, and swayed like a boat tossed on a
stormy sea. I had to hold on. The road grew more level, and we appeared
to fly along. Then the mountains seemed to come nearer to us on each
side and to frown down upon us; we were entering on the Borgo Pass. One
by one several of the passengers offered me gifts, which they pressed
upon me with an earnestness which would take no denial; these were
certainly of an odd and varied kind, but each was given in simple good
faith, with a kindly word, and a blessing, and that strange mixture of
fear-meaning movements which I had seen outside the hotel at
Bistritz--the sign of the cross and the guard against the evil eye.
Then, as we flew along, the driver leaned forward, and on each side the
passengers, craning over the edge of the coach, peered eagerly into the
darkness. It was evident that something very exciting was either
happening or expected, but though I asked each passenger, no one would
give me the slightest explanation. This state of excitement kept on for
some little time; and at last we saw before us the Pass opening out on
the eastern side. There were dark, rolling clouds overhead, and in the
air the heavy, oppressive sense of thunder. It seemed as though the
mountain range had separated two atmospheres, and that now we had got
into the thunderous one. I was now myself looking out for the conveyance
which was to take me to the Count. Each moment I expected to see the
glare of lamps through the blackness; but all was dark. The only light
was the flickering rays of our own lamps, in which the steam from our
hard-driven horses rose in a white cloud. We could see now the sandy
road lying white before us, but there was on it no sign of a vehicle.
The passengers drew back with a sigh of gladness, which seemed to mock
my own disappointment. I was already thinking what I had best do, when
the driver, looking at his watch, said to the others something which I
could hardly hear, it was spoken so quietly and in so low a tone; I
thought it was "An hour less than the time." Then turning to me, he said
in German worse than my own:--

"There is no carriage here. The Herr is not expected after all. He will
now come on to Bukovina, and return to-morrow or the next day; better
the next day." Whilst he was speaking the horses began to neigh and
snort and plunge wildly, so that the driver had to hold them up. Then,
amongst a chorus of screams from the peasants and a universal crossing
of themselves, a calèche, with four horses, drove up behind us, overtook
us, and drew up beside the coach. I could see from the flash of our
lamps, as the rays fell on them, that the horses were coal-black and
splendid animals. They were driven by a tall man, with a long brown
beard and a great black hat, which seemed to hide his face from us. I
could only see the gleam of a pair of very bright eyes, which seemed red
in the lamplight, as he turned to us. He said to the driver:--

"You are early to-night, my friend." The man stammered in reply:--

"The English Herr was in a hurry," to which the stranger replied:--

"That is why, I suppose, you wished him to go on to Bukovina. You cannot
deceive me, my friend; I know too much, and my horses are swift." As he
spoke he smiled, and the lamplight fell on a hard-looking mouth, with
very red lips and sharp-looking teeth, as white as ivory. One of my
companions whispered to another the line from Burger's "Lenore":--

    "Denn die Todten reiten schnell"--
    ("For the dead travel fast.")

The strange driver evidently heard the words, for he looked up with a
gleaming smile. The passenger turned his face away, at the same time
putting out his two fingers and crossing himself. "Give me the Herr's
luggage," said the driver; and with exceeding alacrity my bags were
handed out and put in the calèche. Then I descended from the side of the
coach, as the calèche was close alongside, the driver helping me with a
hand which caught my arm in a grip of steel; his strength must have been
prodigious. Without a word he shook his reins, the horses turned, and we
swept into the darkness of the Pass. As I looked back I saw the steam
from the horses of the coach by the light of the lamps, and projected
against it the figures of my late companions crossing themselves. Then
the driver cracked his whip and called to his horses, and off they swept
on their way to Bukovina. As they sank into the darkness I felt a
strange chill, and a lonely feeling came over me; but a cloak was thrown
over my shoulders, and a rug across my knees, and the driver said in
excellent German:--

"The night is chill, mein Herr, and my master the Count bade me take all
care of you. There is a flask of slivovitz (the plum brandy of the
country) underneath the seat, if you should require it." I did not take
any, but it was a comfort to know it was there all the same. I felt a
little strangely, and not a little frightened. I think had there been
any alternative I should have taken it, instead of prosecuting that
unknown night journey. The carriage went at a hard pace straight along,
then we made a complete turn and went along another straight road. It
seemed to me that we were simply going over and over the same ground
again; and so I took note of some salient point, and found that this was
so. I would have liked to have asked the driver what this all meant, but
I really feared to do so, for I thought that, placed as I was, any
protest would have had no effect in case there had been an intention to
delay. By-and-by, however, as I was curious to know how time was
passing, I struck a match, and by its flame looked at my watch; it was
within a few minutes of midnight. This gave me a sort of shock, for I
suppose the general superstition about midnight was increased by my
recent experiences. I waited with a sick feeling of suspense.

Then a dog began to howl somewhere in a farmhouse far down the road--a
long, agonised wailing, as if from fear. The sound was taken up by
another dog, and then another and another, till, borne on the wind which
now sighed softly through the Pass, a wild howling began, which seemed
to come from all over the country, as far as the imagination could grasp
it through the gloom of the night. At the first howl the horses began to
strain and rear, but the driver spoke to them soothingly, and they
quieted down, but shivered and sweated as though after a runaway from
sudden fright. Then, far off in the distance, from the mountains on each
side of us began a louder and a sharper howling--that of wolves--which
affected both the horses and myself in the same way--for I was minded to
jump from the calèche and run, whilst they reared again and plunged
madly, so that the driver had to use all his great strength to keep them
from bolting. In a few minutes, however, my own ears got accustomed to
the sound, and the horses so far became quiet that the driver was able
to descend and to stand before them. He petted and soothed them, and
whispered something in their ears, as I have heard of horse-tamers
doing, and with extraordinary effect, for under his caresses they became
quite manageable again, though they still trembled. The driver again
took his seat, and shaking his reins, started off at a great pace. This
time, after going to the far side of the Pass, he suddenly turned down a
narrow roadway which ran sharply to the right.

Soon we were hemmed in with trees, which in places arched right over the
roadway till we passed as through a tunnel; and again great frowning
rocks guarded us boldly on either side. Though we were in shelter, we
could hear the rising wind, for it moaned and whistled through the
rocks, and the branches of the trees crashed together as we swept along.
It grew colder and colder still, and fine, powdery snow began to fall,
so that soon we and all around us were covered with a white blanket. The
keen wind still carried the howling of the dogs, though this grew
fainter as we went on our way. The baying of the wolves sounded nearer
and nearer, as though they were closing round on us from every side. I
grew dreadfully afraid, and the horses shared my fear. The driver,
however, was not in the least disturbed; he kept turning his head to
left and right, but I could not see anything through the darkness.

Suddenly, away on our left, I saw a faint flickering blue flame. The
driver saw it at the same moment; he at once checked the horses, and,
jumping to the ground, disappeared into the darkness. I did not know
what to do, the less as the howling of the wolves grew closer; but while
I wondered the driver suddenly appeared again, and without a word took
his seat, and we resumed our journey. I think I must have fallen asleep
and kept dreaming of the incident, for it seemed to be repeated
endlessly, and now looking back, it is like a sort of awful nightmare.
Once the flame appeared so near the road, that even in the darkness
around us I could watch the driver's motions. He went rapidly to where
the blue flame arose--it must have been very faint, for it did not seem
to illumine the place around it at all--and gathering a few stones,
formed them into some device. Once there appeared a strange optical
effect: when he stood between me and the flame he did not obstruct it,
for I could see its ghostly flicker all the same. This startled me, but
as the effect was only momentary, I took it that my eyes deceived me
straining through the darkness. Then for a time there were no blue
flames, and we sped onwards through the gloom, with the howling of the
wolves around us, as though they were following in a moving circle.

At last there came a time when the driver went further afield than he
had yet gone, and during his absence, the horses began to tremble worse
than ever and to snort and scream with fright. I could not see any cause
for it, for the howling of the wolves had ceased altogether; but just
then the moon, sailing through the black clouds, appeared behind the
jagged crest of a beetling, pine-clad rock, and by its light I saw
around us a ring of wolves, with white teeth and lolling red tongues,
with long, sinewy limbs and shaggy hair. They were a hundred times more
terrible in the grim silence which held them than even when they howled.
For myself, I felt a sort of paralysis of fear. It is only when a man
feels himself face to face with such horrors that he can understand
their true import.

All at once the wolves began to howl as though the moonlight had had
some peculiar effect on them. The horses jumped about and reared, and
looked helplessly round with eyes that rolled in a way painful to see;
but the living ring of terror encompassed them on every side; and they
had perforce to remain within it. I called to the coachman to come, for
it seemed to me that our only chance was to try to break out through the
ring and to aid his approach. I shouted and beat the side of the
calèche, hoping by the noise to scare the wolves from that side, so as
to give him a chance of reaching the trap. How he came there, I know
not, but I heard his voice raised in a tone of imperious command, and
looking towards the sound, saw him stand in the roadway. As he swept his
long arms, as though brushing aside some impalpable obstacle, the wolves
fell back and back further still. Just then a heavy cloud passed across
the face of the moon, so that we were again in darkness.

When I could see again the driver was climbing into the calèche, and the
wolves had disappeared. This was all so strange and uncanny that a
dreadful fear came upon me, and I was afraid to speak or move. The time
seemed interminable as we swept on our way, now in almost complete
darkness, for the rolling clouds obscured the moon. We kept on
ascending, with occasional periods of quick descent, but in the main
always ascending. Suddenly, I became conscious of the fact that the
driver was in the act of pulling up the horses in the courtyard of a
vast ruined castle, from whose tall black windows came no ray of light,
and whose broken battlements showed a jagged line against the moonlit
sky.




CHAPTER II

JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL--_continued_


_5 May._--I must have been asleep, for certainly if I had been fully
awake I must have noticed the approach of such a remarkable place. In
the gloom the courtyard looked of considerable size, and as several dark
ways led from it under great round arches, it perhaps seemed bigger than
it really is. I have not yet been able to see it by daylight.

When the calèche stopped, the driver jumped down and held out his hand
to assist me to alight. Again I could not but notice his prodigious
strength. His hand actually seemed like a steel vice that could have
crushed mine if he had chosen. Then he took out my traps, and placed
them on the ground beside me as I stood close to a great door, old and
studded with large iron nails, and set in a projecting doorway of
massive stone. I could see even in the dim light that the stone was
massively carved, but that the carving had been much worn by time and
weather. As I stood, the driver jumped again into his seat and shook the
reins; the horses started forward, and trap and all disappeared down one
of the dark openings.

I stood in silence where I was, for I did not know what to do. Of bell
or knocker there was no sign; through these frowning walls and dark
window openings it was not likely that my voice could penetrate. The
time I waited seemed endless, and I felt doubts and fears crowding upon
me. What sort of place had I come to, and among what kind of people?
What sort of grim adventure was it on which I had embarked? Was this a
customary incident in the life of a solicitor's clerk sent out to
explain the purchase of a London estate to a foreigner? Solicitor's
clerk! Mina would not like that. Solicitor--for just before leaving
London I got word that my examination was successful; and I am now a
full-blown solicitor! I began to rub my eyes and pinch myself to see if
I were awake. It all seemed like a horrible nightmare to me, and I
expected that I should suddenly awake, and find myself at home, with
the dawn struggling in through the windows, as I had now and again felt
in the morning after a day of overwork. But my flesh answered the
pinching test, and my eyes were not to be deceived. I was indeed awake
and among the Carpathians. All I could do now was to be patient, and to
wait the coming of the morning.

Just as I had come to this conclusion I heard a heavy step approaching
behind the great door, and saw through the chinks the gleam of a coming
light. Then there was the sound of rattling chains and the clanking of
massive bolts drawn back. A key was turned with the loud grating noise
of long disuse, and the great door swung back.

Within, stood a tall old man, clean shaven save for a long white
moustache, and clad in black from head to foot, without a single speck
of colour about him anywhere. He held in his hand an antique silver
lamp, in which the flame burned without chimney or globe of any kind,
throwing long quivering shadows as it flickered in the draught of the
open door. The old man motioned me in with his right hand with a courtly
gesture, saying in excellent English, but with a strange intonation:--

"Welcome to my house! Enter freely and of your own will!" He made no
motion of stepping to meet me, but stood like a statue, as though his
gesture of welcome had fixed him into stone. The instant, however, that
I had stepped over the threshold, he moved impulsively forward, and
holding out his hand grasped mine with a strength which made me wince,
an effect which was not lessened by the fact that it seemed as cold as
ice--more like the hand of a dead than a living man. Again he said:--

"Welcome to my house. Come freely. Go safely; and leave something of the
happiness you bring!" The strength of the handshake was so much akin to
that which I had noticed in the driver, whose face I had not seen, that
for a moment I doubted if it were not the same person to whom I was
speaking; so to make sure, I said interrogatively:--

"Count Dracula?" He bowed in a courtly way as he replied:--

"I am Dracula; and I bid you welcome, Mr. Harker, to my house. Come in;
the night air is chill, and you must need to eat and rest." As he was
speaking, he put the lamp on a bracket on the wall, and stepping out,
took my luggage; he had carried it in before I could forestall him. I
protested but he insisted:--

"Nay, sir, you are my guest. It is late, and my people are not
available. Let me see to your comfort myself." He insisted on carrying
my traps along the passage, and then up a great winding stair, and
along another great passage, on whose stone floor our steps rang
heavily. At the end of this he threw open a heavy door, and I rejoiced
to see within a well-lit room in which a table was spread for supper,
and on whose mighty hearth a great fire of logs, freshly replenished,
flamed and flared.

The Count halted, putting down my bags, closed the door, and crossing
the room, opened another door, which led into a small octagonal room lit
by a single lamp, and seemingly without a window of any sort. Passing
through this, he opened another door, and motioned me to enter. It was a
welcome sight; for here was a great bedroom well lighted and warmed with
another log fire,--also added to but lately, for the top logs were
fresh--which sent a hollow roar up the wide chimney. The Count himself
left my luggage inside and withdrew, saying, before he closed the
door:--

"You will need, after your journey, to refresh yourself by making your
toilet. I trust you will find all you wish. When you are ready, come
into the other room, where you will find your supper prepared."

The light and warmth and the Count's courteous welcome seemed to have
dissipated all my doubts and fears. Having then reached my normal state,
I discovered that I was half famished with hunger; so making a hasty
toilet, I went into the other room.

I found supper already laid out. My host, who stood on one side of the
great fireplace, leaning against the stonework, made a graceful wave of
his hand to the table, and said:--

"I pray you, be seated and sup how you please. You will, I trust, excuse
me that I do not join you; but I have dined already, and I do not sup."

I handed to him the sealed letter which Mr. Hawkins had entrusted to me.
He opened it and read it gravely; then, with a charming smile, he handed
it to me to read. One passage of it, at least, gave me a thrill of
pleasure.

"I must regret that an attack of gout, from which malady I am a constant
sufferer, forbids absolutely any travelling on my part for some time to
come; but I am happy to say I can send a sufficient substitute, one in
whom I have every possible confidence. He is a young man, full of energy
and talent in his own way, and of a very faithful disposition. He is
discreet and silent, and has grown into manhood in my service. He shall
be ready to attend on you when you will during his stay, and shall take
your instructions in all matters."

The Count himself came forward and took off the cover of a dish, and I
fell to at once on an excellent roast chicken. This, with some cheese
and a salad and a bottle of old Tokay, of which I had two glasses, was
my supper. During the time I was eating it the Count asked me many
questions as to my journey, and I told him by degrees all I had
experienced.

By this time I had finished my supper, and by my host's desire had drawn
up a chair by the fire and begun to smoke a cigar which he offered me,
at the same time excusing himself that he did not smoke. I had now an
opportunity of observing him, and found him of a very marked
physiognomy.

His face was a strong--a very strong--aquiline, with high bridge of the
thin nose and peculiarly arched nostrils; with lofty domed forehead, and
hair growing scantily round the temples but profusely elsewhere. His
eyebrows were very massive, almost meeting over the nose, and with bushy
hair that seemed to curl in its own profusion. The mouth, so far as I
could see it under the heavy moustache, was fixed and rather
cruel-looking, with peculiarly sharp white teeth; these protruded over
the lips, whose remarkable ruddiness showed astonishing vitality in a
man of his years. For the rest, his ears were pale, and at the tops
extremely pointed; the chin was broad and strong, and the cheeks firm
though thin. The general effect was one of extraordinary pallor.

Hitherto I had noticed the backs of his hands as they lay on his knees
in the firelight, and they had seemed rather white and fine; but seeing
them now close to me, I could not but notice that they were rather
coarse--broad, with squat fingers. Strange to say, there were hairs in
the centre of the palm. The nails were long and fine, and cut to a sharp
point. As the Count leaned over me and his hands touched me, I could not
repress a shudder. It may have been that his breath was rank, but a
horrible feeling of nausea came over me, which, do what I would, I could
not conceal. The Count, evidently noticing it, drew back; and with a
grim sort of smile, which showed more than he had yet done his
protuberant teeth, sat himself down again on his own side of the
fireplace. We were both silent for a while; and as I looked towards the
window I saw the first dim streak of the coming dawn. There seemed a
strange stillness over everything; but as I listened I heard as if from
down below in the valley the howling of many wolves. The Count's eyes
gleamed, and he said:--

"Listen to them--the children of the night. What music they make!"
Seeing, I suppose, some expression in my face strange to him, he
added:--

"Ah, sir, you dwellers in the city cannot enter into the feelings of the
hunter." Then he rose and said:--

"But you must be tired. Your bedroom is all ready, and to-morrow you
shall sleep as late as you will. I have to be away till the afternoon;
so sleep well and dream well!" With a courteous bow, he opened for me
himself the door to the octagonal room, and I entered my bedroom....

I am all in a sea of wonders. I doubt; I fear; I think strange things,
which I dare not confess to my own soul. God keep me, if only for the
sake of those dear to me!

       *       *       *       *       *

_7 May._--It is again early morning, but I have rested and enjoyed the
last twenty-four hours. I slept till late in the day, and awoke of my
own accord. When I had dressed myself I went into the room where we had
supped, and found a cold breakfast laid out, with coffee kept hot by the
pot being placed on the hearth. There was a card on the table, on which
was written:--

"I have to be absent for a while. Do not wait for me.--D." I set to and
enjoyed a hearty meal. When I had done, I looked for a bell, so that I
might let the servants know I had finished; but I could not find one.
There are certainly odd deficiencies in the house, considering the
extraordinary evidences of wealth which are round me. The table service
is of gold, and so beautifully wrought that it must be of immense value.
The curtains and upholstery of the chairs and sofas and the hangings of
my bed are of the costliest and most beautiful fabrics, and must have
been of fabulous value when they were made, for they are centuries old,
though in excellent order. I saw something like them in Hampton Court,
but there they were worn and frayed and moth-eaten. But still in none of
the rooms is there a mirror. There is not even a toilet glass on my
table, and I had to get the little shaving glass from my bag before I
could either shave or brush my hair. I have not yet seen a servant
anywhere, or heard a sound near the castle except the howling of wolves.
Some time after I had finished my meal--I do not know whether to call it
breakfast or dinner, for it was between five and six o'clock when I had
it--I looked about for something to read, for I did not like to go about
the castle until I had asked the Count's permission. There was
absolutely nothing in the room, book, newspaper, or even writing
materials; so I opened another door in the room and found a sort of
library. The door opposite mine I tried, but found it locked.

In the library I found, to my great delight, a vast number of English
books, whole shelves full of them, and bound volumes of magazines and
newspapers. A table in the centre was littered with English magazines
and newspapers, though none of them were of very recent date. The books
were of the most varied kind--history, geography, politics, political
economy, botany, geology, law--all relating to England and English life
and customs and manners. There were even such books of reference as the
London Directory, the "Red" and "Blue" books, Whitaker's Almanac, the
Army and Navy Lists, and--it somehow gladdened my heart to see it--the
Law List.

Whilst I was looking at the books, the door opened, and the Count
entered. He saluted me in a hearty way, and hoped that I had had a good
night's rest. Then he went on:--

"I am glad you found your way in here, for I am sure there is much that
will interest you. These companions"--and he laid his hand on some of
the books--"have been good friends to me, and for some years past, ever
since I had the idea of going to London, have given me many, many hours
of pleasure. Through them I have come to know your great England; and to
know her is to love her. I long to go through the crowded streets of
your mighty London, to be in the midst of the whirl and rush of
humanity, to share its life, its change, its death, and all that makes
it what it is. But alas! as yet I only know your tongue through books.
To you, my friend, I look that I know it to speak."

"But, Count," I said, "you know and speak English thoroughly!" He bowed
gravely.

"I thank you, my friend, for your all too-flattering estimate, but yet I
fear that I am but a little way on the road I would travel. True, I know
the grammar and the words, but yet I know not how to speak them."

"Indeed," I said, "you speak excellently."

"Not so," he answered. "Well, I know that, did I move and speak in your
London, none there are who would not know me for a stranger. That is not
enough for me. Here I am noble; I am _boyar_; the common people know me,
and I am master. But a stranger in a strange land, he is no one; men
know him not--and to know not is to care not for. I am content if I am
like the rest, so that no man stops if he see me, or pause in his
speaking if he hear my words, 'Ha, ha! a stranger!' I have been so long
master that I would be master still--or at least that none other should
be master of me. You come to me not alone as agent of my friend Peter
Hawkins, of Exeter, to tell me all about my new estate in London. You
shall, I trust, rest here with me awhile, so that by our talking I may
learn the English intonation; and I would that you tell me when I make
error, even of the smallest, in my speaking. I am sorry that I had to be
away so long to-day; but you will, I know, forgive one who has so many
important affairs in hand."

Of course I said all I could about being willing, and asked if I might
come into that room when I chose. He answered: "Yes, certainly," and
added:--

"You may go anywhere you wish in the castle, except where the doors are
locked, where of course you will not wish to go. There is reason that
all things are as they are, and did you see with my eyes and know with
my knowledge, you would perhaps better understand." I said I was sure of
this, and then he went on:--

"We are in Transylvania; and Transylvania is not England. Our ways are
not your ways, and there shall be to you many strange things. Nay, from
what you have told me of your experiences already, you know something of
what strange things there may be."

This led to much conversation; and as it was evident that he wanted to
talk, if only for talking's sake, I asked him many questions regarding
things that had already happened to me or come within my notice.
Sometimes he sheered off the subject, or turned the conversation by
pretending not to understand; but generally he answered all I asked most
frankly. Then as time went on, and I had got somewhat bolder, I asked
him of some of the strange things of the preceding night, as, for
instance, why the coachman went to the places where he had seen the blue
flames. He then explained to me that it was commonly believed that on a
certain night of the year--last night, in fact, when all evil spirits
are supposed to have unchecked sway--a blue flame is seen over any place
where treasure has been concealed. "That treasure has been hidden," he
went on, "in the region through which you came last night, there can be
but little doubt; for it was the ground fought over for centuries by the
Wallachian, the Saxon, and the Turk. Why, there is hardly a foot of soil
in all this region that has not been enriched by the blood of men,
patriots or invaders. In old days there were stirring times, when the
Austrian and the Hungarian came up in hordes, and the patriots went out
to meet them--men and women, the aged and the children too--and waited
their coming on the rocks above the passes, that they might sweep
destruction on them with their artificial avalanches. When the invader
was triumphant he found but little, for whatever there was had been
sheltered in the friendly soil."

"But how," said I, "can it have remained so long undiscovered, when
there is a sure index to it if men will but take the trouble to look?"
The Count smiled, and as his lips ran back over his gums, the long,
sharp, canine teeth showed out strangely; he answered:--

"Because your peasant is at heart a coward and a fool! Those flames only
appear on one night; and on that night no man of this land will, if he
can help it, stir without his doors. And, dear sir, even if he did he
would not know what to do. Why, even the peasant that you tell me of who
marked the place of the flame would not know where to look in daylight
even for his own work. Even you would not, I dare be sworn, be able to
find these places again?"

"There you are right," I said. "I know no more than the dead where even
to look for them." Then we drifted into other matters.

"Come," he said at last, "tell me of London and of the house which you
have procured for me." With an apology for my remissness, I went into my
own room to get the papers from my bag. Whilst I was placing them in
order I heard a rattling of china and silver in the next room, and as I
passed through, noticed that the table had been cleared and the lamp
lit, for it was by this time deep into the dark. The lamps were also lit
in the study or library, and I found the Count lying on the sofa,
reading, of all things in the world, an English Bradshaw's Guide. When I
came in he cleared the books and papers from the table; and with him I
went into plans and deeds and figures of all sorts. He was interested in
everything, and asked me a myriad questions about the place and its
surroundings. He clearly had studied beforehand all he could get on the
subject of the neighbourhood, for he evidently at the end knew very much
more than I did. When I remarked this, he answered:--

"Well, but, my friend, is it not needful that I should? When I go there
I shall be all alone, and my friend Harker Jonathan--nay, pardon me, I
fall into my country's habit of putting your patronymic first--my friend
Jonathan Harker will not be by my side to correct and aid me. He will be
in Exeter, miles away, probably working at papers of the law with my
other friend, Peter Hawkins. So!"

We went thoroughly into the business of the purchase of the estate at
Purfleet. When I had told him the facts and got his signature to the
necessary papers, and had written a letter with them ready to post to
Mr. Hawkins, he began to ask me how I had come across so suitable a
place. I read to him the notes which I had made at the time, and which I
inscribe here:--

"At Purfleet, on a by-road, I came across just such a place as seemed to
be required, and where was displayed a dilapidated notice that the place
was for sale. It is surrounded by a high wall, of ancient structure,
built of heavy stones, and has not been repaired for a large number of
years. The closed gates are of heavy old oak and iron, all eaten with
rust.

"The estate is called Carfax, no doubt a corruption of the old _Quatre
Face_, as the house is four-sided, agreeing with the cardinal points of
the compass. It contains in all some twenty acres, quite surrounded by
the solid stone wall above mentioned. There are many trees on it, which
make it in places gloomy, and there is a deep, dark-looking pond or
small lake, evidently fed by some springs, as the water is clear and
flows away in a fair-sized stream. The house is very large and of all
periods back, I should say, to mediæval times, for one part is of stone
immensely thick, with only a few windows high up and heavily barred with
iron. It looks like part of a keep, and is close to an old chapel or
church. I could not enter it, as I had not the key of the door leading
to it from the house, but I have taken with my kodak views of it from
various points. The house has been added to, but in a very straggling
way, and I can only guess at the amount of ground it covers, which must
be very great. There are but few houses close at hand, one being a very
large house only recently added to and formed into a private lunatic
asylum. It is not, however, visible from the grounds."

When I had finished, he said:--

"I am glad that it is old and big. I myself am of an old family, and to
live in a new house would kill me. A house cannot be made habitable in a
day; and, after all, how few days go to make up a century. I rejoice
also that there is a chapel of old times. We Transylvanian nobles love
not to think that our bones may lie amongst the common dead. I seek not
gaiety nor mirth, not the bright voluptuousness of much sunshine and
sparkling waters which please the young and gay. I am no longer young;
and my heart, through weary years of mourning over the dead, is not
attuned to mirth. Moreover, the walls of my castle are broken; the
shadows are many, and the wind breathes cold through the broken
battlements and casements. I love the shade and the shadow, and would
be alone with my thoughts when I may." Somehow his words and his look
did not seem to accord, or else it was that his cast of face made his
smile look malignant and saturnine.

Presently, with an excuse, he left me, asking me to put all my papers
together. He was some little time away, and I began to look at some of
the books around me. One was an atlas, which I found opened naturally at
England, as if that map had been much used. On looking at it I found in
certain places little rings marked, and on examining these I noticed
that one was near London on the east side, manifestly where his new
estate was situated; the other two were Exeter, and Whitby on the
Yorkshire coast.

It was the better part of an hour when the Count returned. "Aha!" he
said; "still at your books? Good! But you must not work always. Come; I
am informed that your supper is ready." He took my arm, and we went into
the next room, where I found an excellent supper ready on the table. The
Count again excused himself, as he had dined out on his being away from
home. But he sat as on the previous night, and chatted whilst I ate.
After supper I smoked, as on the last evening, and the Count stayed with
me, chatting and asking questions on every conceivable subject, hour
after hour. I felt that it was getting very late indeed, but I did not
say anything, for I felt under obligation to meet my host's wishes in
every way. I was not sleepy, as the long sleep yesterday had fortified
me; but I could not help experiencing that chill which comes over one at
the coming of the dawn, which is like, in its way, the turn of the tide.
They say that people who are near death die generally at the change to
the dawn or at the turn of the tide; any one who has when tired, and
tied as it were to his post, experienced this change in the atmosphere
can well believe it. All at once we heard the crow of a cock coming up
with preternatural shrillness through the clear morning air; Count
Dracula, jumping to his feet, said:--

"Why, there is the morning again! How remiss I am to let you stay up so
long. You must make your conversation regarding my dear new country of
England less interesting, so that I may not forget how time flies by
us," and, with a courtly bow, he quickly left me.

I went into my own room and drew the curtains, but there was little to
notice; my window opened into the courtyard, all I could see was the
warm grey of quickening sky. So I pulled the curtains again, and have
written of this day.

       *       *       *       *       *

_8 May._--I began to fear as I wrote in this book that I was getting too
diffuse; but now I am glad that I went into detail from the first, for
there is something so strange about this place and all in it that I
cannot but feel uneasy. I wish I were safe out of it, or that I had
never come. It may be that this strange night-existence is telling on
me; but would that that were all! If there were any one to talk to I
could bear it, but there is no one. I have only the Count to speak with,
and he!--I fear I am myself the only living soul within the place. Let
me be prosaic so far as facts can be; it will help me to bear up, and
imagination must not run riot with me. If it does I am lost. Let me say
at once how I stand--or seem to.

I only slept a few hours when I went to bed, and feeling that I could
not sleep any more, got up. I had hung my shaving glass by the window,
and was just beginning to shave. Suddenly I felt a hand on my shoulder,
and heard the Count's voice saying to me, "Good-morning." I started, for
it amazed me that I had not seen him, since the reflection of the glass
covered the whole room behind me. In starting I had cut myself slightly,
but did not notice it at the moment. Having answered the Count's
salutation, I turned to the glass again to see how I had been mistaken.
This time there could be no error, for the man was close to me, and I
could see him over my shoulder. But there was no reflection of him in
the mirror! The whole room behind me was displayed; but there was no
sign of a man in it, except myself. This was startling, and, coming on
the top of so many strange things, was beginning to increase that vague
feeling of uneasiness which I always have when the Count is near; but at
the instant I saw that the cut had bled a little, and the blood was
trickling over my chin. I laid down the razor, turning as I did so half
round to look for some sticking plaster. When the Count saw my face, his
eyes blazed with a sort of demoniac fury, and he suddenly made a grab at
my throat. I drew away, and his hand touched the string of beads which
held the crucifix. It made an instant change in him, for the fury passed
so quickly that I could hardly believe that it was ever there.

"Take care," he said, "take care how you cut yourself. It is more
dangerous than you think in this country." Then seizing the shaving
glass, he went on: "And this is the wretched thing that has done the
mischief. It is a foul bauble of man's vanity. Away with it!" and
opening the heavy window with one wrench of his terrible hand, he flung
out the glass, which was shattered into a thousand pieces on the stones
of the courtyard far below. Then he withdrew without a word. It is very
annoying, for I do not see how I am to shave, unless in my watch-case or
the bottom of the shaving-pot, which is fortunately of metal.

When I went into the dining-room, breakfast was prepared; but I could
not find the Count anywhere. So I breakfasted alone. It is strange that
as yet I have not seen the Count eat or drink. He must be a very
peculiar man! After breakfast I did a little exploring in the castle. I
went out on the stairs, and found a room looking towards the South. The
view was magnificent, and from where I stood there was every opportunity
of seeing it. The castle is on the very edge of a terrible precipice. A
stone falling from the window would fall a thousand feet without
touching anything! As far as the eye can reach is a sea of green tree
tops, with occasionally a deep rift where there is a chasm. Here and
there are silver threads where the rivers wind in deep gorges through
the forests.

But I am not in heart to describe beauty, for when I had seen the view I
explored further; doors, doors, doors everywhere, and all locked and
bolted. In no place save from the windows in the castle walls is there
an available exit.

The castle is a veritable prison, and I am a prisoner!




CHAPTER III

JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL--_continued_


When I found that I was a prisoner a sort of wild feeling came over me.
I rushed up and down the stairs, trying every door and peering out of
every window I could find; but after a little the conviction of my
helplessness overpowered all other feelings. When I look back after a
few hours I think I must have been mad for the time, for I behaved much
as a rat does in a trap. When, however, the conviction had come to me
that I was helpless I sat down quietly--as quietly as I have ever done
anything in my life--and began to think over what was best to be done. I
am thinking still, and as yet have come to no definite conclusion. Of
one thing only am I certain; that it is no use making my ideas known to
the Count. He knows well that I am imprisoned; and as he has done it
himself, and has doubtless his own motives for it, he would only deceive
me if I trusted him fully with the facts. So far as I can see, my only
plan will be to keep my knowledge and my fears to myself, and my eyes
open. I am, I know, either being deceived, like a baby, by my own fears,
or else I am in desperate straits; and if the latter be so, I need, and
shall need, all my brains to get through.

I had hardly come to this conclusion when I heard the great door below
shut, and knew that the Count had returned. He did not come at once into
the library, so I went cautiously to my own room and found him making
the bed. This was odd, but only confirmed what I had all along
thought--that there were no servants in the house. When later I saw him
through the chink of the hinges of the door laying the table in the
dining-room, I was assured of it; for if he does himself all these
menial offices, surely it is proof that there is no one else to do them.
This gave me a fright, for if there is no one else in the castle, it
must have been the Count himself who was the driver of the coach that
brought me here. This is a terrible thought; for if so, what does it
mean that he could control the wolves, as he did, by only holding up his
hand in silence. How was it that all the people at Bistritz and on the
coach had some terrible fear for me? What meant the giving of the
crucifix, of the garlic, of the wild rose, of the mountain ash? Bless
that good, good woman who hung the crucifix round my neck! for it is a
comfort and a strength to me whenever I touch it. It is odd that a thing
which I have been taught to regard with disfavour and as idolatrous
should in a time of loneliness and trouble be of help. Is it that there
is something in the essence of the thing itself, or that it is a medium,
a tangible help, in conveying memories of sympathy and comfort? Some
time, if it may be, I must examine this matter and try to make up my
mind about it. In the meantime I must find out all I can about Count
Dracula, as it may help me to understand. To-night he may talk of
himself, if I turn the conversation that way. I must be very careful,
however, not to awake his suspicion.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Midnight._--I have had a long talk with the Count. I asked him a few
questions on Transylvania history, and he warmed up to the subject
wonderfully. In his speaking of things and people, and especially of
battles, he spoke as if he had been present at them all. This he
afterwards explained by saying that to a _boyar_ the pride of his house
and name is his own pride, that their glory is his glory, that their
fate is his fate. Whenever he spoke of his house he always said "we,"
and spoke almost in the plural, like a king speaking. I wish I could put
down all he said exactly as he said it, for to me it was most
fascinating. It seemed to have in it a whole history of the country. He
grew excited as he spoke, and walked about the room pulling his great
white moustache and grasping anything on which he laid his hands as
though he would crush it by main strength. One thing he said which I
shall put down as nearly as I can; for it tells in its way the story of
his race:--

"We Szekelys have a right to be proud, for in our veins flows the blood
of many brave races who fought as the lion fights, for lordship. Here,
in the whirlpool of European races, the Ugric tribe bore down from
Iceland the fighting spirit which Thor and Wodin gave them, which their
Berserkers displayed to such fell intent on the seaboards of Europe, ay,
and of Asia and Africa too, till the peoples thought that the
were-wolves themselves had come. Here, too, when they came, they found
the Huns, whose warlike fury had swept the earth like a living flame,
till the dying peoples held that in their veins ran the blood of those
old witches, who, expelled from Scythia had mated with the devils in the
desert. Fools, fools! What devil or what witch was ever so great as
Attila, whose blood is in these veins?" He held up his arms. "Is it a
wonder that we were a conquering race; that we were proud; that when the
Magyar, the Lombard, the Avar, the Bulgar, or the Turk poured his
thousands on our frontiers, we drove them back? Is it strange that when
Arpad and his legions swept through the Hungarian fatherland he found us
here when he reached the frontier; that the Honfoglalas was completed
there? And when the Hungarian flood swept eastward, the Szekelys were
claimed as kindred by the victorious Magyars, and to us for centuries
was trusted the guarding of the frontier of Turkey-land; ay, and more
than that, endless duty of the frontier guard, for, as the Turks say,
'water sleeps, and enemy is sleepless.' Who more gladly than we
throughout the Four Nations received the 'bloody sword,' or at its
warlike call flocked quicker to the standard of the King? When was
redeemed that great shame of my nation, the shame of Cassova, when the
flags of the Wallach and the Magyar went down beneath the Crescent? Who
was it but one of my own race who as Voivode crossed the Danube and beat
the Turk on his own ground? This was a Dracula indeed! Woe was it that
his own unworthy brother, when he had fallen, sold his people to the
Turk and brought the shame of slavery on them! Was it not this Dracula,
indeed, who inspired that other of his race who in a later age again and
again brought his forces over the great river into Turkey-land; who,
when he was beaten back, came again, and again, and again, though he had
to come alone from the bloody field where his troops were being
slaughtered, since he knew that he alone could ultimately triumph! They
said that he thought only of himself. Bah! what good are peasants
without a leader? Where ends the war without a brain and heart to
conduct it? Again, when, after the battle of Mohács, we threw off the
Hungarian yoke, we of the Dracula blood were amongst their leaders, for
our spirit would not brook that we were not free. Ah, young sir, the
Szekelys--and the Dracula as their heart's blood, their brains, and
their swords--can boast a record that mushroom growths like the
Hapsburgs and the Romanoffs can never reach. The warlike days are over.
Blood is too precious a thing in these days of dishonourable peace; and
the glories of the great races are as a tale that is told."

It was by this time close on morning, and we went to bed. (_Mem._, this
diary seems horribly like the beginning of the "Arabian Nights," for
everything has to break off at cockcrow--or like the ghost of Hamlet's
father.)

       *       *       *       *       *

_12 May._--Let me begin with facts--bare, meagre facts, verified by
books and figures, and of which there can be no doubt. I must not
confuse them with experiences which will have to rest on my own
observation, or my memory of them. Last evening when the Count came from
his room he began by asking me questions on legal matters and on the
doing of certain kinds of business. I had spent the day wearily over
books, and, simply to keep my mind occupied, went over some of the
matters I had been examining at Lincoln's Inn. There was a certain
method in the Count's inquiries, so I shall try to put them down in
sequence; the knowledge may somehow or some time be useful to me.

First, he asked if a man in England might have two solicitors or more. I
told him he might have a dozen if he wished, but that it would not be
wise to have more than one solicitor engaged in one transaction, as only
one could act at a time, and that to change would be certain to militate
against his interest. He seemed thoroughly to understand, and went on to
ask if there would be any practical difficulty in having one man to
attend, say, to banking, and another to look after shipping, in case
local help were needed in a place far from the home of the banking
solicitor. I asked him to explain more fully, so that I might not by any
chance mislead him, so he said:--

"I shall illustrate. Your friend and mine, Mr. Peter Hawkins, from under
the shadow of your beautiful cathedral at Exeter, which is far from
London, buys for me through your good self my place at London. Good! Now
here let me say frankly, lest you should think it strange that I have
sought the services of one so far off from London instead of some one
resident there, that my motive was that no local interest might be
served save my wish only; and as one of London residence might, perhaps,
have some purpose of himself or friend to serve, I went thus afield to
seek my agent, whose labours should be only to my interest. Now, suppose
I, who have much of affairs, wish to ship goods, say, to Newcastle, or
Durham, or Harwich, or Dover, might it not be that it could with more
ease be done by consigning to one in these ports?" I answered that
certainly it would be most easy, but that we solicitors had a system of
agency one for the other, so that local work could be done locally on
instruction from any solicitor, so that the client, simply placing
himself in the hands of one man, could have his wishes carried out by
him without further trouble.

"But," said he, "I could be at liberty to direct myself. Is it not so?"

"Of course," I replied; and "such is often done by men of business, who
do not like the whole of their affairs to be known by any one person."

"Good!" he said, and then went on to ask about the means of making
consignments and the forms to be gone through, and of all sorts of
difficulties which might arise, but by forethought could be guarded
against. I explained all these things to him to the best of my ability,
and he certainly left me under the impression that he would have made a
wonderful solicitor, for there was nothing that he did not think of or
foresee. For a man who was never in the country, and who did not
evidently do much in the way of business, his knowledge and acumen were
wonderful. When he had satisfied himself on these points of which he had
spoken, and I had verified all as well as I could by the books
available, he suddenly stood up and said:--

"Have you written since your first letter to our friend Mr. Peter
Hawkins, or to any other?" It was with some bitterness in my heart that
I answered that I had not, that as yet I had not seen any opportunity of
sending letters to anybody.

"Then write now, my young friend," he said, laying a heavy hand on my
shoulder: "write to our friend and to any other; and say, if it will
please you, that you shall stay with me until a month from now."

"Do you wish me to stay so long?" I asked, for my heart grew cold at the
thought.

"I desire it much; nay, I will take no refusal. When your master,
employer, what you will, engaged that someone should come on his behalf,
it was understood that my needs only were to be consulted. I have not
stinted. Is it not so?"

What could I do but bow acceptance? It was Mr. Hawkins's interest, not
mine, and I had to think of him, not myself; and besides, while Count
Dracula was speaking, there was that in his eyes and in his bearing
which made me remember that I was a prisoner, and that if I wished it I
could have no choice. The Count saw his victory in my bow, and his
mastery in the trouble of my face, for he began at once to use them, but
in his own smooth, resistless way:--

"I pray you, my good young friend, that you will not discourse of things
other than business in your letters. It will doubtless please your
friends to know that you are well, and that you look forward to getting
home to them. Is it not so?" As he spoke he handed me three sheets of
note-paper and three envelopes. They were all of the thinnest foreign
post, and looking at them, then at him, and noticing his quiet smile,
with the sharp, canine teeth lying over the red underlip, I understood
as well as if he had spoken that I should be careful what I wrote, for
he would be able to read it. So I determined to write only formal notes
now, but to write fully to Mr. Hawkins in secret, and also to Mina, for
to her I could write in shorthand, which would puzzle the Count, if he
did see it. When I had written my two letters I sat quiet, reading a
book whilst the Count wrote several notes, referring as he wrote them to
some books on his table. Then he took up my two and placed them with his
own, and put by his writing materials, after which, the instant the door
had closed behind him, I leaned over and looked at the letters, which
were face down on the table. I felt no compunction in doing so, for
under the circumstances I felt that I should protect myself in every way
I could.

One of the letters was directed to Samuel F. Billington, No. 7, The
Crescent, Whitby, another to Herr Leutner, Varna; the third was to
Coutts & Co., London, and the fourth to Herren Klopstock & Billreuth,
bankers, Buda-Pesth. The second and fourth were unsealed. I was just
about to look at them when I saw the door-handle move. I sank back in my
seat, having just had time to replace the letters as they had been and
to resume my book before the Count, holding still another letter in his
hand, entered the room. He took up the letters on the table and stamped
them carefully, and then turning to me, said:--

"I trust you will forgive me, but I have much work to do in private this
evening. You will, I hope, find all things as you wish." At the door he
turned, and after a moment's pause said:--

"Let me advise you, my dear young friend--nay, let me warn you with all
seriousness, that should you leave these rooms you will not by any
chance go to sleep in any other part of the castle. It is old, and has
many memories, and there are bad dreams for those who sleep unwisely. Be
warned! Should sleep now or ever overcome you, or be like to do, then
haste to your own chamber or to these rooms, for your rest will then be
safe. But if you be not careful in this respect, then"--He finished his
speech in a gruesome way, for he motioned with his hands as if he were
washing them. I quite understood; my only doubt was as to whether any
dream could be more terrible than the unnatural, horrible net of gloom
and mystery which seemed closing around me.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--I endorse the last words written, but this time there is no
doubt in question. I shall not fear to sleep in any place where he is
not. I have placed the crucifix over the head of my bed--I imagine that
my rest is thus freer from dreams; and there it shall remain.

When he left me I went to my room. After a little while, not hearing any
sound, I came out and went up the stone stair to where I could look out
towards the South. There was some sense of freedom in the vast expanse,
inaccessible though it was to me, as compared with the narrow darkness
of the courtyard. Looking out on this, I felt that I was indeed in
prison, and I seemed to want a breath of fresh air, though it were of
the night. I am beginning to feel this nocturnal existence tell on me.
It is destroying my nerve. I start at my own shadow, and am full of all
sorts of horrible imaginings. God knows that there is ground for my
terrible fear in this accursed place! I looked out over the beautiful
expanse, bathed in soft yellow moonlight till it was almost as light as
day. In the soft light the distant hills became melted, and the shadows
in the valleys and gorges of velvety blackness. The mere beauty seemed
to cheer me; there was peace and comfort in every breath I drew. As I
leaned from the window my eye was caught by something moving a storey
below me, and somewhat to my left, where I imagined, from the order of
the rooms, that the windows of the Count's own room would look out. The
window at which I stood was tall and deep, stone-mullioned, and though
weatherworn, was still complete; but it was evidently many a day since
the case had been there. I drew back behind the stonework, and looked
carefully out.

What I saw was the Count's head coming out from the window. I did not
see the face, but I knew the man by the neck and the movement of his
back and arms. In any case I could not mistake the hands which I had had
so many opportunities of studying. I was at first interested and
somewhat amused, for it is wonderful how small a matter will interest
and amuse a man when he is a prisoner. But my very feelings changed to
repulsion and terror when I saw the whole man slowly emerge from the
window and begin to crawl down the castle wall over that dreadful abyss,
_face down_ with his cloak spreading out around him like great wings. At
first I could not believe my eyes. I thought it was some trick of the
moonlight, some weird effect of shadow; but I kept looking, and it could
be no delusion. I saw the fingers and toes grasp the corners of the
stones, worn clear of the mortar by the stress of years, and by thus
using every projection and inequality move downwards with considerable
speed, just as a lizard moves along a wall.

What manner of man is this, or what manner of creature is it in the
semblance of man? I feel the dread of this horrible place overpowering
me; I am in fear--in awful fear--and there is no escape for me; I am
encompassed about with terrors that I dare not think of....

       *       *       *       *       *

_15 May._--Once more have I seen the Count go out in his lizard fashion.
He moved downwards in a sidelong way, some hundred feet down, and a good
deal to the left. He vanished into some hole or window. When his head
had disappeared, I leaned out to try and see more, but without
avail--the distance was too great to allow a proper angle of sight. I
knew he had left the castle now, and thought to use the opportunity to
explore more than I had dared to do as yet. I went back to the room, and
taking a lamp, tried all the doors. They were all locked, as I had
expected, and the locks were comparatively new; but I went down the
stone stairs to the hall where I had entered originally. I found I could
pull back the bolts easily enough and unhook the great chains; but the
door was locked, and the key was gone! That key must be in the Count's
room; I must watch should his door be unlocked, so that I may get it and
escape. I went on to make a thorough examination of the various stairs
and passages, and to try the doors that opened from them. One or two
small rooms near the hall were open, but there was nothing to see in
them except old furniture, dusty with age and moth-eaten. At last,
however, I found one door at the top of the stairway which, though it
seemed to be locked, gave a little under pressure. I tried it harder,
and found that it was not really locked, but that the resistance came
from the fact that the hinges had fallen somewhat, and the heavy door
rested on the floor. Here was an opportunity which I might not have
again, so I exerted myself, and with many efforts forced it back so that
I could enter. I was now in a wing of the castle further to the right
than the rooms I knew and a storey lower down. From the windows I could
see that the suite of rooms lay along to the south of the castle, the
windows of the end room looking out both west and south. On the latter
side, as well as to the former, there was a great precipice. The castle
was built on the corner of a great rock, so that on three sides it was
quite impregnable, and great windows were placed here where sling, or
bow, or culverin could not reach, and consequently light and comfort,
impossible to a position which had to be guarded, were secured. To the
west was a great valley, and then, rising far away, great jagged
mountain fastnesses, rising peak on peak, the sheer rock studded with
mountain ash and thorn, whose roots clung in cracks and crevices and
crannies of the stone. This was evidently the portion of the castle
occupied by the ladies in bygone days, for the furniture had more air of
comfort than any I had seen. The windows were curtainless, and the
yellow moonlight, flooding in through the diamond panes, enabled one to
see even colours, whilst it softened the wealth of dust which lay over
all and disguised in some measure the ravages of time and the moth. My
lamp seemed to be of little effect in the brilliant moonlight, but I was
glad to have it with me, for there was a dread loneliness in the place
which chilled my heart and made my nerves tremble. Still, it was better
than living alone in the rooms which I had come to hate from the
presence of the Count, and after trying a little to school my nerves, I
found a soft quietude come over me. Here I am, sitting at a little oak
table where in old times possibly some fair lady sat to pen, with much
thought and many blushes, her ill-spelt love-letter, and writing in my
diary in shorthand all that has happened since I closed it last. It is
nineteenth century up-to-date with a vengeance. And yet, unless my
senses deceive me, the old centuries had, and have, powers of their own
which mere "modernity" cannot kill.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later: the Morning of 16 May._--God preserve my sanity, for to this I
am reduced. Safety and the assurance of safety are things of the past.
Whilst I live on here there is but one thing to hope for, that I may not
go mad, if, indeed, I be not mad already. If I be sane, then surely it
is maddening to think that of all the foul things that lurk in this
hateful place the Count is the least dreadful to me; that to him alone I
can look for safety, even though this be only whilst I can serve his
purpose. Great God! merciful God! Let me be calm, for out of that way
lies madness indeed. I begin to get new lights on certain things which
have puzzled me. Up to now I never quite knew what Shakespeare meant
when he made Hamlet say:--

    "My tablets! quick, my tablets!
    'Tis meet that I put it down," etc.,

for now, feeling as though my own brain were unhinged or as if the shock
had come which must end in its undoing, I turn to my diary for repose.
The habit of entering accurately must help to soothe me.

The Count's mysterious warning frightened me at the time; it frightens
me more now when I think of it, for in future he has a fearful hold upon
me. I shall fear to doubt what he may say!

When I had written in my diary and had fortunately replaced the book and
pen in my pocket I felt sleepy. The Count's warning came into my mind,
but I took a pleasure in disobeying it. The sense of sleep was upon me,
and with it the obstinacy which sleep brings as outrider. The soft
moonlight soothed, and the wide expanse without gave a sense of freedom
which refreshed me. I determined not to return to-night to the
gloom-haunted rooms, but to sleep here, where, of old, ladies had sat
and sung and lived sweet lives whilst their gentle breasts were sad for
their menfolk away in the midst of remorseless wars. I drew a great
couch out of its place near the corner, so that as I lay, I could look
at the lovely view to east and south, and unthinking of and uncaring for
the dust, composed myself for sleep. I suppose I must have fallen
asleep; I hope so, but I fear, for all that followed was startlingly
real--so real that now sitting here in the broad, full sunlight of the
morning, I cannot in the least believe that it was all sleep.

I was not alone. The room was the same, unchanged in any way since I
came into it; I could see along the floor, in the brilliant moonlight,
my own footsteps marked where I had disturbed the long accumulation of
dust. In the moonlight opposite me were three young women, ladies by
their dress and manner. I thought at the time that I must be dreaming
when I saw them, for, though the moonlight was behind them, they threw
no shadow on the floor. They came close to me, and looked at me for some
time, and then whispered together. Two were dark, and had high aquiline
noses, like the Count, and great dark, piercing eyes that seemed to be
almost red when contrasted with the pale yellow moon. The other was
fair, as fair as can be, with great wavy masses of golden hair and eyes
like pale sapphires. I seemed somehow to know her face, and to know it
in connection with some dreamy fear, but I could not recollect at the
moment how or where. All three had brilliant white teeth that shone like
pearls against the ruby of their voluptuous lips. There was something
about them that made me uneasy, some longing and at the same time some
deadly fear. I felt in my heart a wicked, burning desire that they would
kiss me with those red lips. It is not good to note this down, lest some
day it should meet Mina's eyes and cause her pain; but it is the truth.
They whispered together, and then they all three laughed--such a
silvery, musical laugh, but as hard as though the sound never could have
come through the softness of human lips. It was like the intolerable,
tingling sweetness of water-glasses when played on by a cunning hand.
The fair girl shook her head coquettishly, and the other two urged her
on. One said:--

"Go on! You are first, and we shall follow; yours is the right to
begin." The other added:--

"He is young and strong; there are kisses for us all." I lay quiet,
looking out under my eyelashes in an agony of delightful anticipation.
The fair girl advanced and bent over me till I could feel the movement
of her breath upon me. Sweet it was in one sense, honey-sweet, and sent
the same tingling through the nerves as her voice, but with a bitter
underlying the sweet, a bitter offensiveness, as one smells in blood.

I was afraid to raise my eyelids, but looked out and saw perfectly under
the lashes. The girl went on her knees, and bent over me, simply
gloating. There was a deliberate voluptuousness which was both thrilling
and repulsive, and as she arched her neck she actually licked her lips
like an animal, till I could see in the moonlight the moisture shining
on the scarlet lips and on the red tongue as it lapped the white sharp
teeth. Lower and lower went her head as the lips went below the range of
my mouth and chin and seemed about to fasten on my throat. Then she
paused, and I could hear the churning sound of her tongue as it licked
her teeth and lips, and could feel the hot breath on my neck. Then the
skin of my throat began to tingle as one's flesh does when the hand that
is to tickle it approaches nearer--nearer. I could feel the soft,
shivering touch of the lips on the super-sensitive skin of my throat,
and the hard dents of two sharp teeth, just touching and pausing there.
I closed my eyes in a languorous ecstasy and waited--waited with beating
heart.

But at that instant, another sensation swept through me as quick as
lightning. I was conscious of the presence of the Count, and of his
being as if lapped in a storm of fury. As my eyes opened involuntarily I
saw his strong hand grasp the slender neck of the fair woman and with
giant's power draw it back, the blue eyes transformed with fury, the
white teeth champing with rage, and the fair cheeks blazing red with
passion. But the Count! Never did I imagine such wrath and fury, even to
the demons of the pit. His eyes were positively blazing. The red light
in them was lurid, as if the flames of hell-fire blazed behind them. His
face was deathly pale, and the lines of it were hard like drawn wires;
the thick eyebrows that met over the nose now seemed like a heaving bar
of white-hot metal. With a fierce sweep of his arm, he hurled the woman
from him, and then motioned to the others, as though he were beating
them back; it was the same imperious gesture that I had seen used to the
wolves. In a voice which, though low and almost in a whisper seemed to
cut through the air and then ring round the room he said:--

"How dare you touch him, any of you? How dare you cast eyes on him when
I had forbidden it? Back, I tell you all! This man belongs to me! Beware
how you meddle with him, or you'll have to deal with me." The fair girl,
with a laugh of ribald coquetry, turned to answer him:--

"You yourself never loved; you never love!" On this the other women
joined, and such a mirthless, hard, soulless laughter rang through the
room that it almost made me faint to hear; it seemed like the pleasure
of fiends. Then the Count turned, after looking at my face attentively,
and said in a soft whisper:--

"Yes, I too can love; you yourselves can tell it from the past. Is it
not so? Well, now I promise you that when I am done with him you shall
kiss him at your will. Now go! go! I must awaken him, for there is work
to be done."

"Are we to have nothing to-night?" said one of them, with a low laugh,
as she pointed to the bag which he had thrown upon the floor, and which
moved as though there were some living thing within it. For answer he
nodded his head. One of the women jumped forward and opened it. If my
ears did not deceive me there was a gasp and a low wail, as of a
half-smothered child. The women closed round, whilst I was aghast with
horror; but as I looked they disappeared, and with them the dreadful
bag. There was no door near them, and they could not have passed me
without my noticing. They simply seemed to fade into the rays of the
moonlight and pass out through the window, for I could see outside the
dim, shadowy forms for a moment before they entirely faded away.

Then the horror overcame me, and I sank down unconscious.




CHAPTER IV

JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL--_continued_


I awoke in my own bed. If it be that I had not dreamt, the Count must
have carried me here. I tried to satisfy myself on the subject, but
could not arrive at any unquestionable result. To be sure, there were
certain small evidences, such as that my clothes were folded and laid by
in a manner which was not my habit. My watch was still unwound, and I am
rigorously accustomed to wind it the last thing before going to bed, and
many such details. But these things are no proof, for they may have been
evidences that my mind was not as usual, and, from some cause or
another, I had certainly been much upset. I must watch for proof. Of one
thing I am glad: if it was that the Count carried me here and undressed
me, he must have been hurried in his task, for my pockets are intact. I
am sure this diary would have been a mystery to him which he would not
have brooked. He would have taken or destroyed it. As I look round this
room, although it has been to me so full of fear, it is now a sort of
sanctuary, for nothing can be more dreadful than those awful women, who
were--who _are_--waiting to suck my blood.

       *       *       *       *       *

_18 May._--I have been down to look at that room again in daylight, for
I _must_ know the truth. When I got to the doorway at the top of the
stairs I found it closed. It had been so forcibly driven against the
jamb that part of the woodwork was splintered. I could see that the bolt
of the lock had not been shot, but the door is fastened from the inside.
I fear it was no dream, and must act on this surmise.

       *       *       *       *       *

_19 May._--I am surely in the toils. Last night the Count asked me in
the suavest tones to write three letters, one saying that my work here
was nearly done, and that I should start for home within a few days,
another that I was starting on the next morning from the time of the
letter, and the third that I had left the castle and arrived at
Bistritz. I would fain have rebelled, but felt that in the present state
of things it would be madness to quarrel openly with the Count whilst I
am so absolutely in his power; and to refuse would be to excite his
suspicion and to arouse his anger. He knows that I know too much, and
that I must not live, lest I be dangerous to him; my only chance is to
prolong my opportunities. Something may occur which will give me a
chance to escape. I saw in his eyes something of that gathering wrath
which was manifest when he hurled that fair woman from him. He explained
to me that posts were few and uncertain, and that my writing now would
ensure ease of mind to my friends; and he assured me with so much
impressiveness that he would countermand the later letters, which would
be held over at Bistritz until due time in case chance would admit of my
prolonging my stay, that to oppose him would have been to create new
suspicion. I therefore pretended to fall in with his views, and asked
him what dates I should put on the letters. He calculated a minute, and
then said:--

"The first should be June 12, the second June 19, and the third June
29."

I know now the span of my life. God help me!

       *       *       *       *       *

_28 May._--There is a chance of escape, or at any rate of being able to
send word home. A band of Szgany have come to the castle, and are
encamped in the courtyard. These Szgany are gipsies; I have notes of
them in my book. They are peculiar to this part of the world, though
allied to the ordinary gipsies all the world over. There are thousands
of them in Hungary and Transylvania, who are almost outside all law.
They attach themselves as a rule to some great noble or _boyar_, and
call themselves by his name. They are fearless and without religion,
save superstition, and they talk only their own varieties of the Romany
tongue.

I shall write some letters home, and shall try to get them to have them
posted. I have already spoken them through my window to begin
acquaintanceship. They took their hats off and made obeisance and many
signs, which, however, I could not understand any more than I could
their spoken language....

       *       *       *       *       *

I have written the letters. Mina's is in shorthand, and I simply ask Mr.
Hawkins to communicate with her. To her I have explained my situation,
but without the horrors which I may only surmise. It would shock and
frighten her to death were I to expose my heart to her. Should the
letters not carry, then the Count shall not yet know my secret or the
extent of my knowledge....

       *       *       *       *       *

I have given the letters; I threw them through the bars of my window
with a gold piece, and made what signs I could to have them posted. The
man who took them pressed them to his heart and bowed, and then put them
in his cap. I could do no more. I stole back to the study, and began to
read. As the Count did not come in, I have written here....

       *       *       *       *       *

The Count has come. He sat down beside me, and said in his smoothest
voice as he opened two letters:--

"The Szgany has given me these, of which, though I know not whence they
come, I shall, of course, take care. See!"--he must have looked at
it--"one is from you, and to my friend Peter Hawkins; the other"--here
he caught sight of the strange symbols as he opened the envelope, and
the dark look came into his face, and his eyes blazed wickedly--"the
other is a vile thing, an outrage upon friendship and hospitality! It is
not signed. Well! so it cannot matter to us." And he calmly held letter
and envelope in the flame of the lamp till they were consumed. Then he
went on:--

"The letter to Hawkins--that I shall, of course, send on, since it is
yours. Your letters are sacred to me. Your pardon, my friend, that
unknowingly I did break the seal. Will you not cover it again?" He held
out the letter to me, and with a courteous bow handed me a clean
envelope. I could only redirect it and hand it to him in silence. When
he went out of the room I could hear the key turn softly. A minute later
I went over and tried it, and the door was locked.

When, an hour or two after, the Count came quietly into the room, his
coming awakened me, for I had gone to sleep on the sofa. He was very
courteous and very cheery in his manner, and seeing that I had been
sleeping, he said:--

"So, my friend, you are tired? Get to bed. There is the surest rest. I
may not have the pleasure to talk to-night, since there are many labours
to me; but you will sleep, I pray." I passed to my room and went to bed,
and, strange to say, slept without dreaming. Despair has its own calms.

       *       *       *       *       *

_31 May._--This morning when I woke I thought I would provide myself
with some paper and envelopes from my bag and keep them in my pocket, so
that I might write in case I should get an opportunity, but again a
surprise, again a shock!

Every scrap of paper was gone, and with it all my notes, my memoranda,
relating to railways and travel, my letter of credit, in fact all that
might be useful to me were I once outside the castle. I sat and pondered
awhile, and then some thought occurred to me, and I made search of my
portmanteau and in the wardrobe where I had placed my clothes.

The suit in which I had travelled was gone, and also my overcoat and
rug; I could find no trace of them anywhere. This looked like some new
scheme of villainy....

       *       *       *       *       *

_17 June._--This morning, as I was sitting on the edge of my bed
cudgelling my brains, I heard without a cracking of whips and pounding
and scraping of horses' feet up the rocky path beyond the courtyard.
With joy I hurried to the window, and saw drive into the yard two great
leiter-wagons, each drawn by eight sturdy horses, and at the head of
each pair a Slovak, with his wide hat, great nail-studded belt, dirty
sheepskin, and high boots. They had also their long staves in hand. I
ran to the door, intending to descend and try and join them through the
main hall, as I thought that way might be opened for them. Again a
shock: my door was fastened on the outside.

Then I ran to the window and cried to them. They looked up at me
stupidly and pointed, but just then the "hetman" of the Szgany came out,
and seeing them pointing to my window, said something, at which they
laughed. Henceforth no effort of mine, no piteous cry or agonised
entreaty, would make them even look at me. They resolutely turned away.
The leiter-wagons contained great, square boxes, with handles of thick
rope; these were evidently empty by the ease with which the Slovaks
handled them, and by their resonance as they were roughly moved. When
they were all unloaded and packed in a great heap in one corner of the
yard, the Slovaks were given some money by the Szgany, and spitting on
it for luck, lazily went each to his horse's head. Shortly afterwards, I
heard the cracking of their whips die away in the distance.

       *       *       *       *       *

_24 June, before morning._--Last night the Count left me early, and
locked himself into his own room. As soon as I dared I ran up the
winding stair, and looked out of the window, which opened south. I
thought I would watch for the Count, for there is something going on.
The Szgany are quartered somewhere in the castle and are doing work of
some kind. I know it, for now and then I hear a far-away muffled sound
as of mattock and spade, and, whatever it is, it must be the end of some
ruthless villainy.

I had been at the window somewhat less than half an hour, when I saw
something coming out of the Count's window. I drew back and watched
carefully, and saw the whole man emerge. It was a new shock to me to
find that he had on the suit of clothes which I had worn whilst
travelling here, and slung over his shoulder the terrible bag which I
had seen the women take away. There could be no doubt as to his quest,
and in my garb, too! This, then, is his new scheme of evil: that he will
allow others to see me, as they think, so that he may both leave
evidence that I have been seen in the towns or villages posting my own
letters, and that any wickedness which he may do shall by the local
people be attributed to me.

It makes me rage to think that this can go on, and whilst I am shut up
here, a veritable prisoner, but without that protection of the law which
is even a criminal's right and consolation.

I thought I would watch for the Count's return, and for a long time sat
doggedly at the window. Then I began to notice that there were some
quaint little specks floating in the rays of the moonlight. They were
like the tiniest grains of dust, and they whirled round and gathered in
clusters in a nebulous sort of way. I watched them with a sense of
soothing, and a sort of calm stole over me. I leaned back in the
embrasure in a more comfortable position, so that I could enjoy more
fully the aërial gambolling.

Something made me start up, a low, piteous howling of dogs somewhere far
below in the valley, which was hidden from my sight. Louder it seemed to
ring in my ears, and the floating motes of dust to take new shapes to
the sound as they danced in the moonlight. I felt myself struggling to
awake to some call of my instincts; nay, my very soul was struggling,
and my half-remembered sensibilities were striving to answer the call. I
was becoming hypnotised! Quicker and quicker danced the dust; the
moonbeams seemed to quiver as they went by me into the mass of gloom
beyond. More and more they gathered till they seemed to take dim phantom
shapes. And then I started, broad awake and in full possession of my
senses, and ran screaming from the place. The phantom shapes, which were
becoming gradually materialised from the moonbeams, were those of the
three ghostly women to whom I was doomed. I fled, and felt somewhat
safer in my own room, where there was no moonlight and where the lamp
was burning brightly.

When a couple of hours had passed I heard something stirring in the
Count's room, something like a sharp wail quickly suppressed; and then
there was silence, deep, awful silence, which chilled me. With a
beating heart, I tried the door; but I was locked in my prison, and
could do nothing. I sat down and simply cried.

As I sat I heard a sound in the courtyard without--the agonised cry of a
woman. I rushed to the window, and throwing it up, peered out between
the bars. There, indeed, was a woman with dishevelled hair, holding her
hands over her heart as one distressed with running. She was leaning
against a corner of the gateway. When she saw my face at the window she
threw herself forward, and shouted in a voice laden with menace:--

"Monster, give me my child!"

She threw herself on her knees, and raising up her hands, cried the same
words in tones which wrung my heart. Then she tore her hair and beat her
breast, and abandoned herself to all the violences of extravagant
emotion. Finally, she threw herself forward, and, though I could not see
her, I could hear the beating of her naked hands against the door.

Somewhere high overhead, probably on the tower, I heard the voice of the
Count calling in his harsh, metallic whisper. His call seemed to be
answered from far and wide by the howling of wolves. Before many minutes
had passed a pack of them poured, like a pent-up dam when liberated,
through the wide entrance into the courtyard.

There was no cry from the woman, and the howling of the wolves was but
short. Before long they streamed away singly, licking their lips.

I could not pity her, for I knew now what had become of her child, and
she was better dead.

What shall I do? what can I do? How can I escape from this dreadful
thing of night and gloom and fear?

       *       *       *       *       *

_25 June, morning._--No man knows till he has suffered from the night
how sweet and how dear to his heart and eye the morning can be. When the
sun grew so high this morning that it struck the top of the great
gateway opposite my window, the high spot which it touched seemed to me
as if the dove from the ark had lighted there. My fear fell from me as
if it had been a vaporous garment which dissolved in the warmth. I must
take action of some sort whilst the courage of the day is upon me. Last
night one of my post-dated letters went to post, the first of that fatal
series which is to blot out the very traces of my existence from the
earth.

Let me not think of it. Action!

It has always been at night-time that I have been molested or
threatened, or in some way in danger or in fear. I have not yet seen the
Count in the daylight. Can it be that he sleeps when others wake, that
he may be awake whilst they sleep? If I could only get into his room!
But there is no possible way. The door is always locked, no way for me.

Yes, there is a way, if one dares to take it. Where his body has gone
why may not another body go? I have seen him myself crawl from his
window. Why should not I imitate him, and go in by his window? The
chances are desperate, but my need is more desperate still. I shall risk
it. At the worst it can only be death; and a man's death is not a
calf's, and the dreaded Hereafter may still be open to me. God help me
in my task! Good-bye, Mina, if I fail; good-bye, my faithful friend and
second father; good-bye, all, and last of all Mina!

       *       *       *       *       *

_Same day, later._--I have made the effort, and God, helping me, have
come safely back to this room. I must put down every detail in order. I
went whilst my courage was fresh straight to the window on the south
side, and at once got outside on the narrow ledge of stone which runs
around the building on this side. The stones are big and roughly cut,
and the mortar has by process of time been washed away between them. I
took off my boots, and ventured out on the desperate way. I looked down
once, so as to make sure that a sudden glimpse of the awful depth would
not overcome me, but after that kept my eyes away from it. I knew pretty
well the direction and distance of the Count's window, and made for it
as well as I could, having regard to the opportunities available. I did
not feel dizzy--I suppose I was too excited--and the time seemed
ridiculously short till I found myself standing on the window-sill and
trying to raise up the sash. I was filled with agitation, however, when
I bent down and slid feet foremost in through the window. Then I looked
around for the Count, but, with surprise and gladness, made a discovery.
The room was empty! It was barely furnished with odd things, which
seemed to have never been used; the furniture was something the same
style as that in the south rooms, and was covered with dust. I looked
for the key, but it was not in the lock, and I could not find it
anywhere. The only thing I found was a great heap of gold in one
corner--gold of all kinds, Roman, and British, and Austrian, and
Hungarian, and Greek and Turkish money, covered with a film of dust, as
though it had lain long in the ground. None of it that I noticed was
less than three hundred years old. There were also chains and ornaments,
some jewelled, but all of them old and stained.

At one corner of the room was a heavy door. I tried it, for, since I
could not find the key of the room or the key of the outer door, which
was the main object of my search, I must make further examination, or
all my efforts would be in vain. It was open, and led through a stone
passage to a circular stairway, which went steeply down. I descended,
minding carefully where I went, for the stairs were dark, being only lit
by loopholes in the heavy masonry. At the bottom there was a dark,
tunnel-like passage, through which came a deathly, sickly odour, the
odour of old earth newly turned. As I went through the passage the smell
grew closer and heavier. At last I pulled open a heavy door which stood
ajar, and found myself in an old, ruined chapel, which had evidently
been used as a graveyard. The roof was broken, and in two places were
steps leading to vaults, but the ground had recently been dug over, and
the earth placed in great wooden boxes, manifestly those which had been
brought by the Slovaks. There was nobody about, and I made search for
any further outlet, but there was none. Then I went over every inch of
the ground, so as not to lose a chance. I went down even into the
vaults, where the dim light struggled, although to do so was a dread to
my very soul. Into two of these I went, but saw nothing except fragments
of old coffins and piles of dust; in the third, however, I made a
discovery.

There, in one of the great boxes, of which there were fifty in all, on a
pile of newly dug earth, lay the Count! He was either dead or asleep, I
could not say which--for the eyes were open and stony, but without the
glassiness of death--and the cheeks had the warmth of life through all
their pallor; the lips were as red as ever. But there was no sign of
movement, no pulse, no breath, no beating of the heart. I bent over him,
and tried to find any sign of life, but in vain. He could not have lain
there long, for the earthy smell would have passed away in a few hours.
By the side of the box was its cover, pierced with holes here and there.
I thought he might have the keys on him, but when I went to search I saw
the dead eyes, and in them, dead though they were, such a look of hate,
though unconscious of me or my presence, that I fled from the place, and
leaving the Count's room by the window, crawled again up the castle
wall. Regaining my room, I threw myself panting upon the bed and tried
to think....

       *       *       *       *       *

_29 June._--To-day is the date of my last letter, and the Count has
taken steps to prove that it was genuine, for again I saw him leave the
castle by the same window, and in my clothes. As he went down the wall,
lizard fashion, I wished I had a gun or some lethal weapon, that I might
destroy him; but I fear that no weapon wrought alone by man's hand would
have any effect on him. I dared not wait to see him return, for I feared
to see those weird sisters. I came back to the library, and read there
till I fell asleep.

I was awakened by the Count, who looked at me as grimly as a man can
look as he said:--

"To-morrow, my friend, we must part. You return to your beautiful
England, I to some work which may have such an end that we may never
meet. Your letter home has been despatched; to-morrow I shall not be
here, but all shall be ready for your journey. In the morning come the
Szgany, who have some labours of their own here, and also come some
Slovaks. When they have gone, my carriage shall come for you, and shall
bear you to the Borgo Pass to meet the diligence from Bukovina to
Bistritz. But I am in hopes that I shall see more of you at Castle
Dracula." I suspected him, and determined to test his sincerity.
Sincerity! It seems like a profanation of the word to write it in
connection with such a monster, so asked him point-blank:--

"Why may I not go to-night?"

"Because, dear sir, my coachman and horses are away on a mission."

"But I would walk with pleasure. I want to get away at once." He smiled,
such a soft, smooth, diabolical smile that I knew there was some trick
behind his smoothness. He said:--

"And your baggage?"

"I do not care about it. I can send for it some other time."

The Count stood up, and said, with a sweet courtesy which made me rub my
eyes, it seemed so real:--

"You English have a saying which is close to my heart, for its spirit is
that which rules our _boyars_: 'Welcome the coming; speed the parting
guest.' Come with me, my dear young friend. Not an hour shall you wait
in my house against your will, though sad am I at your going, and that
you so suddenly desire it. Come!" With a stately gravity, he, with the
lamp, preceded me down the stairs and along the hall. Suddenly he
stopped.

"Hark!"

Close at hand came the howling of many wolves. It was almost as if the
sound sprang up at the rising of his hand, just as the music of a great
orchestra seems to leap under the bâton of the conductor. After a pause
of a moment, he proceeded, in his stately way, to the door, drew back
the ponderous bolts, unhooked the heavy chains, and began to draw it
open.

To my intense astonishment I saw that it was unlocked. Suspiciously, I
looked all round, but could see no key of any kind.

As the door began to open, the howling of the wolves without grew louder
and angrier; their red jaws, with champing teeth, and their blunt-clawed
feet as they leaped, came in through the opening door. I knew then that
to struggle at the moment against the Count was useless. With such
allies as these at his command, I could do nothing. But still the door
continued slowly to open, and only the Count's body stood in the gap.
Suddenly it struck me that this might be the moment and means of my
doom; I was to be given to the wolves, and at my own instigation. There
was a diabolical wickedness in the idea great enough for the Count, and
as a last chance I cried out:--

"Shut the door; I shall wait till morning!" and covered my face with my
hands to hide my tears of bitter disappointment. With one sweep of his
powerful arm, the Count threw the door shut, and the great bolts clanged
and echoed through the hall as they shot back into their places.

In silence we returned to the library, and after a minute or two I went
to my own room. The last I saw of Count Dracula was his kissing his hand
to me; with a red light of triumph in his eyes, and with a smile that
Judas in hell might be proud of.

When I was in my room and about to lie down, I thought I heard a
whispering at my door. I went to it softly and listened. Unless my ears
deceived me, I heard the voice of the Count:--

"Back, back, to your own place! Your time is not yet come. Wait! Have
patience! To-night is mine. To-morrow night is yours!" There was a low,
sweet ripple of laughter, and in a rage I threw open the door, and saw
without the three terrible women licking their lips. As I appeared they
all joined in a horrible laugh, and ran away.

I came back to my room and threw myself on my knees. It is then so near
the end? To-morrow! to-morrow! Lord, help me, and those to whom I am
dear!

       *       *       *       *       *

_30 June, morning._--These may be the last words I ever write in this
diary. I slept till just before the dawn, and when I woke threw myself
on my knees, for I determined that if Death came he should find me
ready.

At last I felt that subtle change in the air, and knew that the morning
had come. Then came the welcome cock-crow, and I felt that I was safe.
With a glad heart, I opened my door and ran down to the hall. I had seen
that the door was unlocked, and now escape was before me. With hands
that trembled with eagerness, I unhooked the chains and drew back the
massive bolts.

But the door would not move. Despair seized me. I pulled, and pulled, at
the door, and shook it till, massive as it was, it rattled in its
casement. I could see the bolt shot. It had been locked after I left the
Count.

Then a wild desire took me to obtain that key at any risk, and I
determined then and there to scale the wall again and gain the Count's
room. He might kill me, but death now seemed the happier choice of
evils. Without a pause I rushed up to the east window, and scrambled
down the wall, as before, into the Count's room. It was empty, but that
was as I expected. I could not see a key anywhere, but the heap of gold
remained. I went through the door in the corner and down the winding
stair and along the dark passage to the old chapel. I knew now well
enough where to find the monster I sought.

The great box was in the same place, close against the wall, but the lid
was laid on it, not fastened down, but with the nails ready in their
places to be hammered home. I knew I must reach the body for the key, so
I raised the lid, and laid it back against the wall; and then I saw
something which filled my very soul with horror. There lay the Count,
but looking as if his youth had been half renewed, for the white hair
and moustache were changed to dark iron-grey; the cheeks were fuller,
and the white skin seemed ruby-red underneath; the mouth was redder than
ever, for on the lips were gouts of fresh blood, which trickled from the
corners of the mouth and ran over the chin and neck. Even the deep,
burning eyes seemed set amongst swollen flesh, for the lids and pouches
underneath were bloated. It seemed as if the whole awful creature were
simply gorged with blood. He lay like a filthy leech, exhausted with his
repletion. I shuddered as I bent over to touch him, and every sense in
me revolted at the contact; but I had to search, or I was lost. The
coming night might see my own body a banquet in a similar way to those
horrid three. I felt all over the body, but no sign could I find of the
key. Then I stopped and looked at the Count. There was a mocking smile
on the bloated face which seemed to drive me mad. This was the being I
was helping to transfer to London, where, perhaps, for centuries to come
he might, amongst its teeming millions, satiate his lust for blood, and
create a new and ever-widening circle of semi-demons to batten on the
helpless. The very thought drove me mad. A terrible desire came upon me
to rid the world of such a monster. There was no lethal weapon at hand,
but I seized a shovel which the workmen had been using to fill the
cases, and lifting it high, struck, with the edge downward, at the
hateful face. But as I did so the head turned, and the eyes fell full
upon me, with all their blaze of basilisk horror. The sight seemed to
paralyse me, and the shovel turned in my hand and glanced from the face,
merely making a deep gash above the forehead. The shovel fell from my
hand across the box, and as I pulled it away the flange of the blade
caught the edge of the lid which fell over again, and hid the horrid
thing from my sight. The last glimpse I had was of the bloated face,
blood-stained and fixed with a grin of malice which would have held its
own in the nethermost hell.

I thought and thought what should be my next move, but my brain seemed
on fire, and I waited with a despairing feeling growing over me. As I
waited I heard in the distance a gipsy song sung by merry voices coming
closer, and through their song the rolling of heavy wheels and the
cracking of whips; the Szgany and the Slovaks of whom the Count had
spoken were coming. With a last look around and at the box which
contained the vile body, I ran from the place and gained the Count's
room, determined to rush out at the moment the door should be opened.
With strained ears, I listened, and heard downstairs the grinding of the
key in the great lock and the falling back of the heavy door. There must
have been some other means of entry, or some one had a key for one of
the locked doors. Then there came the sound of many feet tramping and
dying away in some passage which sent up a clanging echo. I turned to
run down again towards the vault, where I might find the new entrance;
but at the moment there seemed to come a violent puff of wind, and the
door to the winding stair blew to with a shock that set the dust from
the lintels flying. When I ran to push it open, I found that it was
hopelessly fast. I was again a prisoner, and the net of doom was closing
round me more closely.

As I write there is in the passage below a sound of many tramping feet
and the crash of weights being set down heavily, doubtless the boxes,
with their freight of earth. There is a sound of hammering; it is the
box being nailed down. Now I can hear the heavy feet tramping again
along the hall, with many other idle feet coming behind them.

The door is shut, and the chains rattle; there is a grinding of the key
in the lock; I can hear the key withdraw: then another door opens and
shuts; I hear the creaking of lock and bolt.

Hark! in the courtyard and down the rocky way the roll of heavy wheels,
the crack of whips, and the chorus of the Szgany as they pass into the
distance.

I am alone in the castle with those awful women. Faugh! Mina is a woman,
and there is nought in common. They are devils of the Pit!

I shall not remain alone with them; I shall try to scale the castle wall
farther than I have yet attempted. I shall take some of the gold with
me, lest I want it later. I may find a way from this dreadful place.

And then away for home! away to the quickest and nearest train! away
from this cursed spot, from this cursed land, where the devil and his
children still walk with earthly feet!

At least God's mercy is better than that of these monsters, and the
precipice is steep and high. At its foot a man may sleep--as a man.
Good-bye, all! Mina!




CHAPTER V

_Letter from Miss Mina Murray to Miss Lucy Westenra._


"_9 May._

"My dearest Lucy,--

"Forgive my long delay in writing, but I have been simply overwhelmed
with work. The life of an assistant schoolmistress is sometimes trying.
I am longing to be with you, and by the sea, where we can talk together
freely and build our castles in the air. I have been working very hard
lately, because I want to keep up with Jonathan's studies, and I have
been practising shorthand very assiduously. When we are married I shall
be able to be useful to Jonathan, and if I can stenograph well enough I
can take down what he wants to say in this way and write it out for
him on the typewriter, at which also I am practising very hard. He
and I sometimes write letters in shorthand, and he is keeping a
stenographic journal of his travels abroad. When I am with you I
shall keep a diary in the same way. I don't mean one of those
two-pages-to-the-week-with-Sunday-squeezed-in-a-corner diaries, but a
sort of journal which I can write in whenever I feel inclined. I do not
suppose there will be much of interest to other people; but it is not
intended for them. I may show it to Jonathan some day if there is in it
anything worth sharing, but it is really an exercise book. I shall try
to do what I see lady journalists do: interviewing and writing
descriptions and trying to remember conversations. I am told that, with
a little practice, one can remember all that goes on or that one hears
said during a day. However, we shall see. I will tell you of my little
plans when we meet. I have just had a few hurried lines from Jonathan
from Transylvania. He is well, and will be returning in about a week. I
am longing to hear all his news. It must be so nice to see strange
countries. I wonder if we--I mean Jonathan and I--shall ever see them
together. There is the ten o'clock bell ringing. Good-bye.

"Your loving

"MINA.

"Tell me all the news when you write. You have not told me anything for
a long time. I hear rumours, and especially of a tall, handsome,
curly-haired man???"


_Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Murray_.

"_17, Chatham Street_,

"_Wednesday_.

"My dearest Mina,--

"I must say you tax me _very_ unfairly with being a bad correspondent. I
wrote to you _twice_ since we parted, and your last letter was only your
_second_. Besides, I have nothing to tell you. There is really nothing
to interest you. Town is very pleasant just now, and we go a good deal
to picture-galleries and for walks and rides in the park. As to the
tall, curly-haired man, I suppose it was the one who was with me at the
last Pop. Some one has evidently been telling tales. That was Mr.
Holmwood. He often comes to see us, and he and mamma get on very well
together; they have so many things to talk about in common. We met some
time ago a man that would just _do for you_, if you were not already
engaged to Jonathan. He is an excellent _parti_, being handsome, well
off, and of good birth. He is a doctor and really clever. Just fancy! He
is only nine-and-twenty, and he has an immense lunatic asylum all under
his own care. Mr. Holmwood introduced him to me, and he called here to
see us, and often comes now. I think he is one of the most resolute men
I ever saw, and yet the most calm. He seems absolutely imperturbable. I
can fancy what a wonderful power he must have over his patients. He has
a curious habit of looking one straight in the face, as if trying to
read one's thoughts. He tries this on very much with me, but I flatter
myself he has got a tough nut to crack. I know that from my glass. Do
you ever try to read your own face? _I do_, and I can tell you it is not
a bad study, and gives you more trouble than you can well fancy if you
have never tried it. He says that I afford him a curious psychological
study, and I humbly think I do. I do not, as you know, take sufficient
interest in dress to be able to describe the new fashions. Dress is a
bore. That is slang again, but never mind; Arthur says that every day.
There, it is all out. Mina, we have told all our secrets to each other
since we were _children_; we have slept together and eaten together, and
laughed and cried together; and now, though I have spoken, I would like
to speak more. Oh, Mina, couldn't you guess? I love him. I am blushing
as I write, for although I _think_ he loves me, he has not told me so in
words. But oh, Mina, I love him; I love him; I love him! There, that
does me good. I wish I were with you, dear, sitting by the fire
undressing, as we used to sit; and I would try to tell you what I feel.
I do not know how I am writing this even to you. I am afraid to stop,
or I should tear up the letter, and I don't want to stop, for I _do_ so
want to tell you all. Let me hear from you _at once_, and tell me all
that you think about it. Mina, I must stop. Good-night. Bless me in your
prayers; and, Mina, pray for my happiness.

"LUCY.

"P.S.--I need not tell you this is a secret. Good-night again.

"L."

_Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Murray_.

"_24 May_.

"My dearest Mina,--

"Thanks, and thanks, and thanks again for your sweet letter. It was so
nice to be able to tell you and to have your sympathy.

"My dear, it never rains but it pours. How true the old proverbs are.
Here am I, who shall be twenty in September, and yet I never had a
proposal till to-day, not a real proposal, and to-day I have had three.
Just fancy! THREE proposals in one day! Isn't it awful! I feel sorry,
really and truly sorry, for two of the poor fellows. Oh, Mina, I am so
happy that I don't know what to do with myself. And three proposals!
But, for goodness' sake, don't tell any of the girls, or they would be
getting all sorts of extravagant ideas and imagining themselves injured
and slighted if in their very first day at home they did not get six at
least. Some girls are so vain! You and I, Mina dear, who are engaged and
are going to settle down soon soberly into old married women, can
despise vanity. Well, I must tell you about the three, but you must keep
it a secret, dear, from _every one_, except, of course, Jonathan. You
will tell him, because I would, if I were in your place, certainly tell
Arthur. A woman ought to tell her husband everything--don't you think
so, dear?--and I must be fair. Men like women, certainly their wives, to
be quite as fair as they are; and women, I am afraid, are not always
quite as fair as they should be. Well, my dear, number One came just
before lunch. I told you of him, Dr. John Seward, the lunatic-asylum
man, with the strong jaw and the good forehead. He was very cool
outwardly, but was nervous all the same. He had evidently been schooling
himself as to all sorts of little things, and remembered them; but he
almost managed to sit down on his silk hat, which men don't generally do
when they are cool, and then when he wanted to appear at ease he kept
playing with a lancet in a way that made me nearly scream. He spoke to
me, Mina, very straightforwardly. He told me how dear I was to him,
though he had known me so little, and what his life would be with me to
help and cheer him. He was going to tell me how unhappy he would be if I
did not care for him, but when he saw me cry he said that he was a brute
and would not add to my present trouble. Then he broke off and asked if
I could love him in time; and when I shook my head his hands trembled,
and then with some hesitation he asked me if I cared already for any one
else. He put it very nicely, saying that he did not want to wring my
confidence from me, but only to know, because if a woman's heart was
free a man might have hope. And then, Mina, I felt a sort of duty to
tell him that there was some one. I only told him that much, and then he
stood up, and he looked very strong and very grave as he took both my
hands in his and said he hoped I would be happy, and that if I ever
wanted a friend I must count him one of my best. Oh, Mina dear, I can't
help crying: and you must excuse this letter being all blotted. Being
proposed to is all very nice and all that sort of thing, but it isn't at
all a happy thing when you have to see a poor fellow, whom you know
loves you honestly, going away and looking all broken-hearted, and to
know that, no matter what he may say at the moment, you are passing
quite out of his life. My dear, I must stop here at present, I feel so
miserable, though I am so happy.

"_Evening._

"Arthur has just gone, and I feel in better spirits than when I left
off, so I can go on telling you about the day. Well, my dear, number Two
came after lunch. He is such a nice fellow, an American from Texas, and
he looks so young and so fresh that it seems almost impossible that he
has been to so many places and has had such adventures. I sympathise
with poor Desdemona when she had such a dangerous stream poured in her
ear, even by a black man. I suppose that we women are such cowards that
we think a man will save us from fears, and we marry him. I know now
what I would do if I were a man and wanted to make a girl love me. No, I
don't, for there was Mr. Morris telling us his stories, and Arthur never
told any, and yet---- My dear, I am somewhat previous. Mr. Quincey P.
Morris found me alone. It seems that a man always does find a girl
alone. No, he doesn't, for Arthur tried twice to _make_ a chance, and I
helping him all I could; I am not ashamed to say it now. I must tell you
beforehand that Mr. Morris doesn't always speak slang--that is to say,
he never does so to strangers or before them, for he is really well
educated and has exquisite manners--but he found out that it amused me
to hear him talk American slang, and whenever I was present, and there
was no one to be shocked, he said such funny things. I am afraid, my
dear, he has to invent it all, for it fits exactly into whatever else he
has to say. But this is a way slang has. I do not know myself if I shall
ever speak slang; I do not know if Arthur likes it, as I have never
heard him use any as yet. Well, Mr. Morris sat down beside me and looked
as happy and jolly as he could, but I could see all the same that he was
very nervous. He took my hand in his, and said ever so sweetly:--

"'Miss Lucy, I know I ain't good enough to regulate the fixin's of your
little shoes, but I guess if you wait till you find a man that is you
will go join them seven young women with the lamps when you quit. Won't
you just hitch up alongside of me and let us go down the long road
together, driving in double harness?'

"Well, he did look so good-humoured and so jolly that it didn't seem
half so hard to refuse him as it did poor Dr. Seward; so I said, as
lightly as I could, that I did not know anything of hitching, and that I
wasn't broken to harness at all yet. Then he said that he had spoken in
a light manner, and he hoped that if he had made a mistake in doing so
on so grave, so momentous, an occasion for him, I would forgive him. He
really did look serious when he was saying it, and I couldn't help
feeling a bit serious too--I know, Mina, you will think me a horrid
flirt--though I couldn't help feeling a sort of exultation that he was
number two in one day. And then, my dear, before I could say a word he
began pouring out a perfect torrent of love-making, laying his very
heart and soul at my feet. He looked so earnest over it that I shall
never again think that a man must be playful always, and never earnest,
because he is merry at times. I suppose he saw something in my face
which checked him, for he suddenly stopped, and said with a sort of
manly fervour that I could have loved him for if I had been free:--

"'Lucy, you are an honest-hearted girl, I know. I should not be here
speaking to you as I am now if I did not believe you clean grit, right
through to the very depths of your soul. Tell me, like one good fellow
to another, is there any one else that you care for? And if there is
I'll never trouble you a hair's breadth again, but will be, if you will
let me, a very faithful friend.'

"My dear Mina, why are men so noble when we women are so little worthy
of them? Here was I almost making fun of this great-hearted, true
gentleman. I burst into tears--I am afraid, my dear, you will think
this a very sloppy letter in more ways than one--and I really felt very
badly. Why can't they let a girl marry three men, or as many as want
her, and save all this trouble? But this is heresy, and I must not say
it. I am glad to say that, though I was crying, I was able to look into
Mr. Morris's brave eyes, and I told him out straight:--

"'Yes, there is some one I love, though he has not told me yet that he
even loves me.' I was right to speak to him so frankly, for quite a
light came into his face, and he put out both his hands and took mine--I
think I put them into his--and said in a hearty way:--

"'That's my brave girl. It's better worth being late for a chance of
winning you than being in time for any other girl in the world. Don't
cry, my dear. If it's for me, I'm a hard nut to crack; and I take it
standing up. If that other fellow doesn't know his happiness, well, he'd
better look for it soon, or he'll have to deal with me. Little girl,
your honesty and pluck have made me a friend, and that's rarer than a
lover; it's more unselfish anyhow. My dear, I'm going to have a pretty
lonely walk between this and Kingdom Come. Won't you give me one kiss?
It'll be something to keep off the darkness now and then. You can, you
know, if you like, for that other good fellow--he must be a good fellow,
my dear, and a fine fellow, or you could not love him--hasn't spoken
yet.' That quite won me, Mina, for it _was_ brave and sweet of him, and
noble, too, to a rival--wasn't it?--and he so sad; so I leant over and
kissed him. He stood up with my two hands in his, and as he looked down
into my face--I am afraid I was blushing very much--he said:--

"'Little girl, I hold your hand, and you've kissed me, and if these
things don't make us friends nothing ever will. Thank you for your sweet
honesty to me, and good-bye.' He wrung my hand, and taking up his hat,
went straight out of the room without looking back, without a tear or a
quiver or a pause; and I am crying like a baby. Oh, why must a man like
that be made unhappy when there are lots of girls about who would
worship the very ground he trod on? I know I would if I were free--only
I don't want to be free. My dear, this quite upset me, and I feel I
cannot write of happiness just at once, after telling you of it; and I
don't wish to tell of the number three until it can be all happy.

"Ever your loving

"LUCY.

"P.S.--Oh, about number Three--I needn't tell you of number Three, need
I? Besides, it was all so confused; it seemed only a moment from his
coming into the room till both his arms were round me, and he was
kissing me. I am very, very happy, and I don't know what I have done to
deserve it. I must only try in the future to show that I am not
ungrateful to God for all His goodness to me in sending to me such a
lover, such a husband, and such a friend.

"Good-bye."


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

(Kept in phonograph)

_25 May._--Ebb tide in appetite to-day. Cannot eat, cannot rest, so
diary instead. Since my rebuff of yesterday I have a sort of empty
feeling; nothing in the world seems of sufficient importance to be worth
the doing.... As I knew that the only cure for this sort of thing was
work, I went down amongst the patients. I picked out one who has
afforded me a study of much interest. He is so quaint that I am
determined to understand him as well as I can. To-day I seemed to get
nearer than ever before to the heart of his mystery.

I questioned him more fully than I had ever done, with a view to making
myself master of the facts of his hallucination. In my manner of doing
it there was, I now see, something of cruelty. I seemed to wish to keep
him to the point of his madness--a thing which I avoid with the patients
as I would the mouth of hell.

(_Mem._, under what circumstances would I _not_ avoid the pit of hell?)
_Omnia Romæ venalia sunt._ Hell has its price! _verb. sap._ If there be
anything behind this instinct it will be valuable to trace it afterwards
_accurately_, so I had better commence to do so, therefore--

R. M. Renfield, ætat 59.--Sanguine temperament; great physical strength;
morbidly excitable; periods of gloom, ending in some fixed idea which I
cannot make out. I presume that the sanguine temperament itself and the
disturbing influence end in a mentally-accomplished finish; a possibly
dangerous man, probably dangerous if unselfish. In selfish men caution
is as secure an armour for their foes as for themselves. What I think of
on this point is, when self is the fixed point the centripetal force is
balanced with the centrifugal; when duty, a cause, etc., is the fixed
point, the latter force is paramount, and only accident or a series of
accidents can balance it.


_Letter, Quincey P. Morris to Hon. Arthur Holmwood._

"_25 May._

"My dear Art,--

"We've told yarns by the camp-fire in the prairies; and dressed one
another's wounds after trying a landing at the Marquesas; and drunk
healths on the shore of Titicaca. There are more yarns to be told, and
other wounds to be healed, and another health to be drunk. Won't you let
this be at my camp-fire to-morrow night? I have no hesitation in asking
you, as I know a certain lady is engaged to a certain dinner-party, and
that you are free. There will only be one other, our old pal at the
Korea, Jack Seward. He's coming, too, and we both want to mingle our
weeps over the wine-cup, and to drink a health with all our hearts to
the happiest man in all the wide world, who has won the noblest heart
that God has made and the best worth winning. We promise you a hearty
welcome, and a loving greeting, and a health as true as your own right
hand. We shall both swear to leave you at home if you drink too deep to
a certain pair of eyes. Come!

"Yours, as ever and always,

"QUINCEY P. MORRIS."


_Telegram from Arthur Holmwood to Quincey P. Morris._

"_26 May._

"Count me in every time. I bear messages which will make both your ears
tingle.

"ART."




CHAPTER VI

MINA MURRAY'S JOURNAL


_24 July. Whitby._--Lucy met me at the station, looking sweeter and
lovelier than ever, and we drove up to the house at the Crescent in
which they have rooms. This is a lovely place. The little river, the
Esk, runs through a deep valley, which broadens out as it comes near the
harbour. A great viaduct runs across, with high piers, through which the
view seems somehow further away than it really is. The valley is
beautifully green, and it is so steep that when you are on the high land
on either side you look right across it, unless you are near enough to
see down. The houses of the old town--the side away from us--are all
red-roofed, and seem piled up one over the other anyhow, like the
pictures we see of Nuremberg. Right over the town is the ruin of Whitby
Abbey, which was sacked by the Danes, and which is the scene of part of
"Marmion," where the girl was built up in the wall. It is a most noble
ruin, of immense size, and full of beautiful and romantic bits; there is
a legend that a white lady is seen in one of the windows. Between it and
the town there is another church, the parish one, round which is a big
graveyard, all full of tombstones. This is to my mind the nicest spot in
Whitby, for it lies right over the town, and has a full view of the
harbour and all up the bay to where the headland called Kettleness
stretches out into the sea. It descends so steeply over the harbour that
part of the bank has fallen away, and some of the graves have been
destroyed. In one place part of the stonework of the graves stretches
out over the sandy pathway far below. There are walks, with seats beside
them, through the churchyard; and people go and sit there all day long
looking at the beautiful view and enjoying the breeze. I shall come and
sit here very often myself and work. Indeed, I am writing now, with my
book on my knee, and listening to the talk of three old men who are
sitting beside me. They seem to do nothing all day but sit up here and
talk.

The harbour lies below me, with, on the far side, one long granite wall
stretching out into the sea, with a curve outwards at the end of it, in
the middle of which is a lighthouse. A heavy sea-wall runs along outside
of it. On the near side, the sea-wall makes an elbow crooked inversely,
and its end too has a lighthouse. Between the two piers there is a
narrow opening into the harbour, which then suddenly widens.

It is nice at high water; but when the tide is out it shoals away to
nothing, and there is merely the stream of the Esk, running between
banks of sand, with rocks here and there. Outside the harbour on this
side there rises for about half a mile a great reef, the sharp edge of
which runs straight out from behind the south lighthouse. At the end of
it is a buoy with a bell, which swings in bad weather, and sends in a
mournful sound on the wind. They have a legend here that when a ship is
lost bells are heard out at sea. I must ask the old man about this; he
is coming this way....

He is a funny old man. He must be awfully old, for his face is all
gnarled and twisted like the bark of a tree. He tells me that he is
nearly a hundred, and that he was a sailor in the Greenland fishing
fleet when Waterloo was fought. He is, I am afraid, a very sceptical
person, for when I asked him about the bells at sea and the White Lady
at the abbey he said very brusquely:--

"I wouldn't fash masel' about them, miss. Them things be all wore out.
Mind, I don't say that they never was, but I do say that they wasn't in
my time. They be all very well for comers and trippers, an' the like,
but not for a nice young lady like you. Them feet-folks from York and
Leeds that be always eatin' cured herrin's an' drinkin' tea an' lookin'
out to buy cheap jet would creed aught. I wonder masel' who'd be
bothered tellin' lies to them--even the newspapers, which is full of
fool-talk." I thought he would be a good person to learn interesting
things from, so I asked him if he would mind telling me something about
the whale-fishing in the old days. He was just settling himself to begin
when the clock struck six, whereupon he laboured to get up, and said:--

"I must gang ageeanwards home now, miss. My grand-daughter doesn't like
to be kept waitin' when the tea is ready, for it takes me time to
crammle aboon the grees, for there be a many of 'em; an', miss, I lack
belly-timber sairly by the clock."

He hobbled away, and I could see him hurrying, as well as he could, down
the steps. The steps are a great feature on the place. They lead from
the town up to the church, there are hundreds of them--I do not know how
many--and they wind up in a delicate curve; the slope is so gentle that
a horse could easily walk up and down them. I think they must originally
have had something to do with the abbey. I shall go home too. Lucy went
out visiting with her mother, and as they were only duty calls, I did
not go. They will be home by this.

       *       *       *       *       *

_1 August._--I came up here an hour ago with Lucy, and we had a most
interesting talk with my old friend and the two others who always come
and join him. He is evidently the Sir Oracle of them, and I should think
must have been in his time a most dictatorial person. He will not admit
anything, and downfaces everybody. If he can't out-argue them he bullies
them, and then takes their silence for agreement with his views. Lucy
was looking sweetly pretty in her white lawn frock; she has got a
beautiful colour since she has been here. I noticed that the old men did
not lose any time in coming up and sitting near her when we sat down.
She is so sweet with old people; I think they all fell in love with her
on the spot. Even my old man succumbed and did not contradict her, but
gave me double share instead. I got him on the subject of the legends,
and he went off at once into a sort of sermon. I must try to remember it
and put it down:--

"It be all fool-talk, lock, stock, and barrel; that's what it be, an'
nowt else. These bans an' wafts an' boh-ghosts an' barguests an' bogles
an' all anent them is only fit to set bairns an' dizzy women
a-belderin'. They be nowt but air-blebs. They, an' all grims an' signs
an' warnin's, be all invented by parsons an' illsome beuk-bodies an'
railway touters to skeer an' scunner hafflin's, an' to get folks to do
somethin' that they don't other incline to. It makes me ireful to think
o' them. Why, it's them that, not content with printin' lies on paper
an' preachin' them out of pulpits, does want to be cuttin' them on the
tombstones. Look here all around you in what airt ye will; all them
steans, holdin' up their heads as well as they can out of their pride,
is acant--simply tumblin' down with the weight o' the lies wrote on
them, 'Here lies the body' or 'Sacred to the memory' wrote on all of
them, an' yet in nigh half of them there bean't no bodies at all; an'
the memories of them bean't cared a pinch of snuff about, much less
sacred. Lies all of them, nothin' but lies of one kind or another! My
gog, but it'll be a quare scowderment at the Day of Judgment when they
come tumblin' up in their death-sarks, all jouped together an' tryin' to
drag their tombsteans with them to prove how good they was; some of them
trimmlin' and ditherin', with their hands that dozzened an' slippy from
lyin' in the sea that they can't even keep their grup o' them."

I could see from the old fellow's self-satisfied air and the way in
which he looked round for the approval of his cronies that he was
"showing off," so I put in a word to keep him going:--

"Oh, Mr. Swales, you can't be serious. Surely these tombstones are not
all wrong?"

"Yabblins! There may be a poorish few not wrong, savin' where they make
out the people too good; for there be folk that do think a balm-bowl be
like the sea, if only it be their own. The whole thing be only lies. Now
look you here; you come here a stranger, an' you see this kirk-garth." I
nodded, for I thought it better to assent, though I did not quite
understand his dialect. I knew it had something to do with the church.
He went on: "And you consate that all these steans be aboon folk that be
happed here, snod an' snog?" I assented again. "Then that be just where
the lie comes in. Why, there be scores of these lay-beds that be toom as
old Dun's 'bacca-box on Friday night." He nudged one of his companions,
and they all laughed. "And my gog! how could they be otherwise? Look at
that one, the aftest abaft the bier-bank: read it!" I went over and
read:--

"Edward Spencelagh, master mariner, murdered by pirates off the coast of
Andres, April, 1854, æt. 30." When I came back Mr. Swales went on:--

"Who brought him home, I wonder, to hap him here? Murdered off the coast
of Andres! an' you consated his body lay under! Why, I could name ye a
dozen whose bones lie in the Greenland seas above"--he pointed
northwards--"or where the currents may have drifted them. There be the
steans around ye. Ye can, with your young eyes, read the small-print of
the lies from here. This Braithwaite Lowrey--I knew his father, lost in
the _Lively_ off Greenland in '20; or Andrew Woodhouse, drowned in the
same seas in 1777; or John Paxton, drowned off Cape Farewell a year
later; or old John Rawlings, whose grandfather sailed with me, drowned
in the Gulf of Finland in '50. Do ye think that all these men will have
to make a rush to Whitby when the trumpet sounds? I have me antherums
aboot it! I tell ye that when they got here they'd be jommlin' an'
jostlin' one another that way that it 'ud be like a fight up on the ice
in the old days, when we'd be at one another from daylight to dark, an'
tryin' to tie up our cuts by the light of the aurora borealis." This was
evidently local pleasantry, for the old man cackled over it, and his
cronies joined in with gusto.

"But," I said, "surely you are not quite correct, for you start on the
assumption that all the poor people, or their spirits, will have to
take their tombstones with them on the Day of Judgment. Do you think
that will be really necessary?"

"Well, what else be they tombstones for? Answer me that, miss!"

"To please their relatives, I suppose."

"To please their relatives, you suppose!" This he said with intense
scorn. "How will it pleasure their relatives to know that lies is wrote
over them, and that everybody in the place knows that they be lies?" He
pointed to a stone at our feet which had been laid down as a slab, on
which the seat was rested, close to the edge of the cliff. "Read the
lies on that thruff-stean," he said. The letters were upside down to me
from where I sat, but Lucy was more opposite to them, so she leant over
and read:--

"Sacred to the memory of George Canon, who died, in the hope of a
glorious resurrection, on July, 29, 1873, falling from the rocks at
Kettleness. This tomb was erected by his sorrowing mother to her dearly
beloved son. 'He was the only son of his mother, and she was a widow.'
Really, Mr. Swales, I don't see anything very funny in that!" She spoke
her comment very gravely and somewhat severely.

"Ye don't see aught funny! Ha! ha! But that's because ye don't gawm the
sorrowin' mother was a hell-cat that hated him because he was
acrewk'd--a regular lamiter he was--an' he hated her so that he
committed suicide in order that she mightn't get an insurance she put on
his life. He blew nigh the top of his head off with an old musket that
they had for scarin' the crows with. 'Twarn't for crows then, for it
brought the clegs and the dowps to him. That's the way he fell off the
rocks. And, as to hopes of a glorious resurrection, I've often heard him
say masel' that he hoped he'd go to hell, for his mother was so pious
that she'd be sure to go to heaven, an' he didn't want to addle where
she was. Now isn't that stean at any rate"--he hammered it with his
stick as he spoke--"a pack of lies? and won't it make Gabriel keckle
when Geordie comes pantin' up the grees with the tombstean balanced on
his hump, and asks it to be took as evidence!"

I did not know what to say, but Lucy turned the conversation as she
said, rising up:--

"Oh, why did you tell us of this? It is my favourite seat, and I cannot
leave it; and now I find I must go on sitting over the grave of a
suicide."

"That won't harm ye, my pretty; an' it may make poor Geordie gladsome to
have so trim a lass sittin' on his lap. That won't hurt ye. Why, I've
sat here off an' on for nigh twenty years past, an' it hasn't done me
no harm. Don't ye fash about them as lies under ye, or that doesn' lie
there either! It'll be time for ye to be getting scart when ye see the
tombsteans all run away with, and the place as bare as a stubble-field.
There's the clock, an' I must gang. My service to ye, ladies!" And off
he hobbled.

Lucy and I sat awhile, and it was all so beautiful before us that we
took hands as we sat; and she told me all over again about Arthur and
their coming marriage. That made me just a little heart-sick, for I
haven't heard from Jonathan for a whole month.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The same day._ I came up here alone, for I am very sad. There was no
letter for me. I hope there cannot be anything the matter with Jonathan.
The clock has just struck nine. I see the lights scattered all over the
town, sometimes in rows where the streets are, and sometimes singly;
they run right up the Esk and die away in the curve of the valley. To my
left the view is cut off by a black line of roof of the old house next
the abbey. The sheep and lambs are bleating in the fields away behind
me, and there is a clatter of a donkey's hoofs up the paved road below.
The band on the pier is playing a harsh waltz in good time, and further
along the quay there is a Salvation Army meeting in a back street.
Neither of the bands hears the other, but up here I hear and see them
both. I wonder where Jonathan is and if he is thinking of me! I wish he
were here.


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_5 June._--The case of Renfield grows more interesting the more I get to
understand the man. He has certain qualities very largely developed;
selfishness, secrecy, and purpose. I wish I could get at what is the
object of the latter. He seems to have some settled scheme of his own,
but what it is I do not yet know. His redeeming quality is a love of
animals, though, indeed, he has such curious turns in it that I
sometimes imagine he is only abnormally cruel. His pets are of odd
sorts. Just now his hobby is catching flies. He has at present such a
quantity that I have had myself to expostulate. To my astonishment, he
did not break out into a fury, as I expected, but took the matter in
simple seriousness. He thought for a moment, and then said: "May I have
three days? I shall clear them away." Of course, I said that would do. I
must watch him.

       *       *       *       *       *

_18 June._--He has turned his mind now to spiders, and has got several
very big fellows in a box. He keeps feeding them with his flies, and
the number of the latter is becoming sensibly diminished, although he
has used half his food in attracting more flies from outside to his
room.

       *       *       *       *       *

_1 July._--His spiders are now becoming as great a nuisance as his
flies, and to-day I told him that he must get rid of them. He looked
very sad at this, so I said that he must clear out some of them, at all
events. He cheerfully acquiesced in this, and I gave him the same time
as before for reduction. He disgusted me much while with him, for when a
horrid blow-fly, bloated with some carrion food, buzzed into the room,
he caught it, held it exultantly for a few moments between his finger
and thumb, and, before I knew what he was going to do, put it in his
mouth and ate it. I scolded him for it, but he argued quietly that it
was very good and very wholesome; that it was life, strong life, and
gave life to him. This gave me an idea, or the rudiment of one. I must
watch how he gets rid of his spiders. He has evidently some deep problem
in his mind, for he keeps a little note-book in which he is always
jotting down something. Whole pages of it are filled with masses of
figures, generally single numbers added up in batches, and then the
totals added in batches again, as though he were "focussing" some
account, as the auditors put it.

       *       *       *       *       *

_8 July._--There is a method in his madness, and the rudimentary idea in
my mind is growing. It will be a whole idea soon, and then, oh,
unconscious cerebration! you will have to give the wall to your
conscious brother. I kept away from my friend for a few days, so that I
might notice if there were any change. Things remain as they were except
that he has parted with some of his pets and got a new one. He has
managed to get a sparrow, and has already partially tamed it. His means
of taming is simple, for already the spiders have diminished. Those that
do remain, however, are well fed, for he still brings in the flies by
tempting them with his food.

       *       *       *       *       *

_19 July._--We are progressing. My friend has now a whole colony of
sparrows, and his flies and spiders are almost obliterated. When I came
in he ran to me and said he wanted to ask me a great favour--a very,
very great favour; and as he spoke he fawned on me like a dog. I asked
him what it was, and he said, with a sort of rapture in his voice and
bearing:--

"A kitten, a nice little, sleek playful kitten, that I can play with,
and teach, and feed--and feed--and feed!" I was not unprepared for this
request, for I had noticed how his pets went on increasing in size and
vivacity, but I did not care that his pretty family of tame sparrows
should be wiped out in the same manner as the flies and the spiders; so
I said I would see about it, and asked him if he would not rather have a
cat than a kitten. His eagerness betrayed him as he answered:--

"Oh, yes, I would like a cat! I only asked for a kitten lest you should
refuse me a cat. No one would refuse me a kitten, would they?" I shook
my head, and said that at present I feared it would not be possible, but
that I would see about it. His face fell, and I could see a warning of
danger in it, for there was a sudden fierce, sidelong look which meant
killing. The man is an undeveloped homicidal maniac. I shall test him
with his present craving and see how it will work out; then I shall know
more.

       *       *       *       *       *

_10 p. m._--I have visited him again and found him sitting in a corner
brooding. When I came in he threw himself on his knees before me and
implored me to let him have a cat; that his salvation depended upon it.
I was firm, however, and told him that he could not have it, whereupon
he went without a word, and sat down, gnawing his fingers, in the corner
where I had found him. I shall see him in the morning early.

       *       *       *       *       *

_20 July._--Visited Renfield very early, before the attendant went his
rounds. Found him up and humming a tune. He was spreading out his sugar,
which he had saved, in the window, and was manifestly beginning his
fly-catching again; and beginning it cheerfully and with a good grace. I
looked around for his birds, and not seeing them, asked him where they
were. He replied, without turning round, that they had all flown away.
There were a few feathers about the room and on his pillow a drop of
blood. I said nothing, but went and told the keeper to report to me if
there were anything odd about him during the day.

       *       *       *       *       *

_11 a. m._--The attendant has just been to me to say that Renfield has
been very sick and has disgorged a whole lot of feathers. "My belief is,
doctor," he said, "that he has eaten his birds, and that he just took
and ate them raw!"

       *       *       *       *       *

_11 p. m._--I gave Renfield a strong opiate to-night, enough to make
even him sleep, and took away his pocket-book to look at it. The thought
that has been buzzing about my brain lately is complete, and the theory
proved. My homicidal maniac is of a peculiar kind. I shall have to
invent a new classification for him, and call him a zoöphagous
(life-eating) maniac; what he desires is to absorb as many lives as he
can, and he has laid himself out to achieve it in a cumulative way. He
gave many flies to one spider and many spiders to one bird, and then
wanted a cat to eat the many birds. What would have been his later
steps? It would almost be worth while to complete the experiment. It
might be done if there were only a sufficient cause. Men sneered at
vivisection, and yet look at its results to-day! Why not advance science
in its most difficult and vital aspect--the knowledge of the brain? Had
I even the secret of one such mind--did I hold the key to the fancy of
even one lunatic--I might advance my own branch of science to a pitch
compared with which Burdon-Sanderson's physiology or Ferrier's
brain-knowledge would be as nothing. If only there were a sufficient
cause! I must not think too much of this, or I may be tempted; a good
cause might turn the scale with me, for may not I too be of an
exceptional brain, congenitally?

How well the man reasoned; lunatics always do within their own scope. I
wonder at how many lives he values a man, or if at only one. He has
closed the account most accurately, and to-day begun a new record. How
many of us begin a new record with each day of our lives?

To me it seems only yesterday that my whole life ended with my new hope,
and that truly I began a new record. So it will be until the Great
Recorder sums me up and closes my ledger account with a balance to
profit or loss. Oh, Lucy, Lucy, I cannot be angry with you, nor can I be
angry with my friend whose happiness is yours; but I must only wait on
hopeless and work. Work! work!

If I only could have as strong a cause as my poor mad friend there--a
good, unselfish cause to make me work--that would be indeed happiness.


_Mina Murray's Journal._

_26 July._--I am anxious, and it soothes me to express myself here; it
is like whispering to one's self and listening at the same time. And
there is also something about the shorthand symbols that makes it
different from writing. I am unhappy about Lucy and about Jonathan. I
had not heard from Jonathan for some time, and was very concerned; but
yesterday dear Mr. Hawkins, who is always so kind, sent me a letter from
him. I had written asking him if he had heard, and he said the enclosed
had just been received. It is only a line dated from Castle Dracula,
and says that he is just starting for home. That is not like Jonathan;
I do not understand it, and it makes me uneasy. Then, too, Lucy,
although she is so well, has lately taken to her old habit of walking in
her sleep. Her mother has spoken to me about it, and we have decided
that I am to lock the door of our room every night. Mrs. Westenra has
got an idea that sleep-walkers always go out on roofs of houses and
along the edges of cliffs and then get suddenly wakened and fall over
with a despairing cry that echoes all over the place. Poor dear, she is
naturally anxious about Lucy, and she tells me that her husband, Lucy's
father, had the same habit; that he would get up in the night and dress
himself and go out, if he were not stopped. Lucy is to be married in the
autumn, and she is already planning out her dresses and how her house is
to be arranged. I sympathise with her, for I do the same, only Jonathan
and I will start in life in a very simple way, and shall have to try to
make both ends meet. Mr. Holmwood--he is the Hon. Arthur Holmwood, only
son of Lord Godalming--is coming up here very shortly--as soon as he can
leave town, for his father is not very well, and I think dear Lucy is
counting the moments till he comes. She wants to take him up to the seat
on the churchyard cliff and show him the beauty of Whitby. I daresay it
is the waiting which disturbs her; she will be all right when he
arrives.

       *       *       *       *       *

_27 July._--No news from Jonathan. I am getting quite uneasy about him,
though why I should I do not know; but I do wish that he would write, if
it were only a single line. Lucy walks more than ever, and each night I
am awakened by her moving about the room. Fortunately, the weather is so
hot that she cannot get cold; but still the anxiety and the perpetually
being wakened is beginning to tell on me, and I am getting nervous and
wakeful myself. Thank God, Lucy's health keeps up. Mr. Holmwood has been
suddenly called to Ring to see his father, who has been taken seriously
ill. Lucy frets at the postponement of seeing him, but it does not touch
her looks; she is a trifle stouter, and her cheeks are a lovely
rose-pink. She has lost that anæmic look which she had. I pray it will
all last.

       *       *       *       *       *

_3 August._--Another week gone, and no news from Jonathan, not even to
Mr. Hawkins, from whom I have heard. Oh, I do hope he is not ill. He
surely would have written. I look at that last letter of his, but
somehow it does not satisfy me. It does not read like him, and yet it is
his writing. There is no mistake of that. Lucy has not walked much in
her sleep the last week, but there is an odd concentration about her
which I do not understand; even in her sleep she seems to be watching
me. She tries the door, and finding it locked, goes about the room
searching for the key.

_6 August._--Another three days, and no news. This suspense is getting
dreadful. If I only knew where to write to or where to go to, I should
feel easier; but no one has heard a word of Jonathan since that last
letter. I must only pray to God for patience. Lucy is more excitable
than ever, but is otherwise well. Last night was very threatening, and
the fishermen say that we are in for a storm. I must try to watch it and
learn the weather signs. To-day is a grey day, and the sun as I write is
hidden in thick clouds, high over Kettleness. Everything is grey--except
the green grass, which seems like emerald amongst it; grey earthy rock;
grey clouds, tinged with the sunburst at the far edge, hang over the
grey sea, into which the sand-points stretch like grey fingers. The sea
is tumbling in over the shallows and the sandy flats with a roar,
muffled in the sea-mists drifting inland. The horizon is lost in a grey
mist. All is vastness; the clouds are piled up like giant rocks, and
there is a "brool" over the sea that sounds like some presage of doom.
Dark figures are on the beach here and there, sometimes half shrouded in
the mist, and seem "men like trees walking." The fishing-boats are
racing for home, and rise and dip in the ground swell as they sweep into
the harbour, bending to the scuppers. Here comes old Mr. Swales. He is
making straight for me, and I can see, by the way he lifts his hat, that
he wants to talk....

I have been quite touched by the change in the poor old man. When he sat
down beside me, he said in a very gentle way:--

"I want to say something to you, miss." I could see he was not at ease,
so I took his poor old wrinkled hand in mine and asked him to speak
fully; so he said, leaving his hand in mine:--

"I'm afraid, my deary, that I must have shocked you by all the wicked
things I've been sayin' about the dead, and such like, for weeks past;
but I didn't mean them, and I want ye to remember that when I'm gone. We
aud folks that be daffled, and with one foot abaft the krok-hooal, don't
altogether like to think of it, and we don't want to feel scart of it;
an' that's why I've took to makin' light of it, so that I'd cheer up my
own heart a bit. But, Lord love ye, miss, I ain't afraid of dyin', not a
bit; only I don't want to die if I can help it. My time must be nigh at
hand now, for I be aud, and a hundred years is too much for any man to
expect; and I'm so nigh it that the Aud Man is already whettin' his
scythe. Ye see, I can't get out o' the habit of caffin' about it all at
once; the chafts will wag as they be used to. Some day soon the Angel of
Death will sound his trumpet for me. But don't ye dooal an' greet, my
deary!"--for he saw that I was crying--"if he should come this very
night I'd not refuse to answer his call. For life be, after all, only a
waitin' for somethin' else than what we're doin'; and death be all that
we can rightly depend on. But I'm content, for it's comin' to me, my
deary, and comin' quick. It may be comin' while we be lookin' and
wonderin'. Maybe it's in that wind out over the sea that's bringin' with
it loss and wreck, and sore distress, and sad hearts. Look! look!" he
cried suddenly. "There's something in that wind and in the hoast beyont
that sounds, and looks, and tastes, and smells like death. It's in the
air; I feel it comin'. Lord, make me answer cheerful when my call
comes!" He held up his arms devoutly, and raised his hat. His mouth
moved as though he were praying. After a few minutes' silence, he got
up, shook hands with me, and blessed me, and said good-bye, and hobbled
off. It all touched me, and upset me very much.

I was glad when the coastguard came along, with his spy-glass under his
arm. He stopped to talk with me, as he always does, but all the time
kept looking at a strange ship.

"I can't make her out," he said; "she's a Russian, by the look of her;
but she's knocking about in the queerest way. She doesn't know her mind
a bit; she seems to see the storm coming, but can't decide whether to
run up north in the open, or to put in here. Look there again! She is
steered mighty strangely, for she doesn't mind the hand on the wheel;
changes about with every puff of wind. We'll hear more of her before
this time to-morrow."




CHAPTER VII

CUTTING FROM "THE DAILYGRAPH," 8 AUGUST


(_Pasted in Mina Murray's Journal._)

From a Correspondent.

_Whitby_.

One of the greatest and suddenest storms on record has just been
experienced here, with results both strange and unique. The weather had
been somewhat sultry, but not to any degree uncommon in the month of
August. Saturday evening was as fine as was ever known, and the great
body of holiday-makers laid out yesterday for visits to Mulgrave Woods,
Robin Hood's Bay, Rig Mill, Runswick, Staithes, and the various trips in
the neighbourhood of Whitby. The steamers _Emma_ and _Scarborough_ made
trips up and down the coast, and there was an unusual amount of
"tripping" both to and from Whitby. The day was unusually fine till the
afternoon, when some of the gossips who frequent the East Cliff
churchyard, and from that commanding eminence watch the wide sweep of
sea visible to the north and east, called attention to a sudden show of
"mares'-tails" high in the sky to the north-west. The wind was then
blowing from the south-west in the mild degree which in barometrical
language is ranked "No. 2: light breeze." The coastguard on duty at once
made report, and one old fisherman, who for more than half a century has
kept watch on weather signs from the East Cliff, foretold in an emphatic
manner the coming of a sudden storm. The approach of sunset was so very
beautiful, so grand in its masses of splendidly-coloured clouds, that
there was quite an assemblage on the walk along the cliff in the old
churchyard to enjoy the beauty. Before the sun dipped below the black
mass of Kettleness, standing boldly athwart the western sky, its
downward way was marked by myriad clouds of every sunset-colour--flame,
purple, pink, green, violet, and all the tints of gold; with here and
there masses not large, but of seemingly absolute blackness, in all
sorts of shapes, as well outlined as colossal silhouettes. The
experience was not lost on the painters, and doubtless some of the
sketches of the "Prelude to the Great Storm" will grace the R. A. and R.
I. walls in May next. More than one captain made up his mind then and
there that his "cobble" or his "mule," as they term the different
classes of boats, would remain in the harbour till the storm had passed.
The wind fell away entirely during the evening, and at midnight there
was a dead calm, a sultry heat, and that prevailing intensity which, on
the approach of thunder, affects persons of a sensitive nature. There
were but few lights in sight at sea, for even the coasting steamers,
which usually "hug" the shore so closely, kept well to seaward, and but
few fishing-boats were in sight. The only sail noticeable was a foreign
schooner with all sails set, which was seemingly going westwards. The
foolhardiness or ignorance of her officers was a prolific theme for
comment whilst she remained in sight, and efforts were made to signal
her to reduce sail in face of her danger. Before the night shut down she
was seen with sails idly flapping as she gently rolled on the undulating
swell of the sea,

    "As idle as a painted ship upon a painted ocean."

Shortly before ten o'clock the stillness of the air grew quite
oppressive, and the silence was so marked that the bleating of a sheep
inland or the barking of a dog in the town was distinctly heard, and the
band on the pier, with its lively French air, was like a discord in the
great harmony of nature's silence. A little after midnight came a
strange sound from over the sea, and high overhead the air began to
carry a strange, faint, hollow booming.

Then without warning the tempest broke. With a rapidity which, at the
time, seemed incredible, and even afterwards is impossible to realize,
the whole aspect of nature at once became convulsed. The waves rose in
growing fury, each overtopping its fellow, till in a very few minutes
the lately glassy sea was like a roaring and devouring monster.
White-crested waves beat madly on the level sands and rushed up the
shelving cliffs; others broke over the piers, and with their spume swept
the lanthorns of the lighthouses which rise from the end of either pier
of Whitby Harbour. The wind roared like thunder, and blew with such
force that it was with difficulty that even strong men kept their feet,
or clung with grim clasp to the iron stanchions. It was found necessary
to clear the entire piers from the mass of onlookers, or else the
fatalities of the night would have been increased manifold. To add to
the difficulties and dangers of the time, masses of sea-fog came
drifting inland--white, wet clouds, which swept by in ghostly fashion,
so dank and damp and cold that it needed but little effort of
imagination to think that the spirits of those lost at sea were
touching their living brethren with the clammy hands of death, and many
a one shuddered as the wreaths of sea-mist swept by. At times the mist
cleared, and the sea for some distance could be seen in the glare of the
lightning, which now came thick and fast, followed by such sudden peals
of thunder that the whole sky overhead seemed trembling under the shock
of the footsteps of the storm.

Some of the scenes thus revealed were of immeasurable grandeur and of
absorbing interest--the sea, running mountains high, threw skywards with
each wave mighty masses of white foam, which the tempest seemed to
snatch at and whirl away into space; here and there a fishing-boat, with
a rag of sail, running madly for shelter before the blast; now and again
the white wings of a storm-tossed sea-bird. On the summit of the East
Cliff the new searchlight was ready for experiment, but had not yet been
tried. The officers in charge of it got it into working order, and in
the pauses of the inrushing mist swept with it the surface of the sea.
Once or twice its service was most effective, as when a fishing-boat,
with gunwale under water, rushed into the harbour, able, by the guidance
of the sheltering light, to avoid the danger of dashing against the
piers. As each boat achieved the safety of the port there was a shout of
joy from the mass of people on shore, a shout which for a moment seemed
to cleave the gale and was then swept away in its rush.

Before long the searchlight discovered some distance away a schooner
with all sails set, apparently the same vessel which had been noticed
earlier in the evening. The wind had by this time backed to the east,
and there was a shudder amongst the watchers on the cliff as they
realized the terrible danger in which she now was. Between her and the
port lay the great flat reef on which so many good ships have from time
to time suffered, and, with the wind blowing from its present quarter,
it would be quite impossible that she should fetch the entrance of the
harbour. It was now nearly the hour of high tide, but the waves were so
great that in their troughs the shallows of the shore were almost
visible, and the schooner, with all sails set, was rushing with such
speed that, in the words of one old salt, "she must fetch up somewhere,
if it was only in hell." Then came another rush of sea-fog, greater than
any hitherto--a mass of dank mist, which seemed to close on all things
like a grey pall, and left available to men only the organ of hearing,
for the roar of the tempest, and the crash of the thunder, and the
booming of the mighty billows came through the damp oblivion even louder
than before. The rays of the searchlight were kept fixed on the harbour
mouth across the East Pier, where the shock was expected, and men waited
breathless. The wind suddenly shifted to the north-east, and the remnant
of the sea-fog melted in the blast; and then, _mirabile dictu_, between
the piers, leaping from wave to wave as it rushed at headlong speed,
swept the strange schooner before the blast, with all sail set, and
gained the safety of the harbour. The searchlight followed her, and a
shudder ran through all who saw her, for lashed to the helm was a
corpse, with drooping head, which swung horribly to and fro at each
motion of the ship. No other form could be seen on deck at all. A great
awe came on all as they realised that the ship, as if by a miracle, had
found the harbour, unsteered save by the hand of a dead man! However,
all took place more quickly than it takes to write these words. The
schooner paused not, but rushing across the harbour, pitched herself on
that accumulation of sand and gravel washed by many tides and many
storms into the south-east corner of the pier jutting under the East
Cliff, known locally as Tate Hill Pier.

There was of course a considerable concussion as the vessel drove up on
the sand heap. Every spar, rope, and stay was strained, and some of the
"top-hammer" came crashing down. But, strangest of all, the very instant
the shore was touched, an immense dog sprang up on deck from below, as
if shot up by the concussion, and running forward, jumped from the bow
on the sand. Making straight for the steep cliff, where the churchyard
hangs over the laneway to the East Pier so steeply that some of the flat
tombstones--"thruff-steans" or "through-stones," as they call them in
the Whitby vernacular--actually project over where the sustaining cliff
has fallen away, it disappeared in the darkness, which seemed
intensified just beyond the focus of the searchlight.

It so happened that there was no one at the moment on Tate Hill Pier, as
all those whose houses are in close proximity were either in bed or were
out on the heights above. Thus the coastguard on duty on the eastern
side of the harbour, who at once ran down to the little pier, was the
first to climb on board. The men working the searchlight, after scouring
the entrance of the harbour without seeing anything, then turned the
light on the derelict and kept it there. The coastguard ran aft, and
when he came beside the wheel, bent over to examine it, and recoiled at
once as though under some sudden emotion. This seemed to pique general
curiosity, and quite a number of people began to run. It is a good way
round from the West Cliff by the Drawbridge to Tate Hill Pier, but your
correspondent is a fairly good runner, and came well ahead of the crowd.
When I arrived, however, I found already assembled on the pier a crowd,
whom the coastguard and police refused to allow to come on board. By the
courtesy of the chief boatman, I was, as your correspondent, permitted
to climb on deck, and was one of a small group who saw the dead seaman
whilst actually lashed to the wheel.

It was no wonder that the coastguard was surprised, or even awed, for
not often can such a sight have been seen. The man was simply fastened
by his hands, tied one over the other, to a spoke of the wheel. Between
the inner hand and the wood was a crucifix, the set of beads on which it
was fastened being around both wrists and wheel, and all kept fast by
the binding cords. The poor fellow may have been seated at one time, but
the flapping and buffeting of the sails had worked through the rudder of
the wheel and dragged him to and fro, so that the cords with which he
was tied had cut the flesh to the bone. Accurate note was made of the
state of things, and a doctor--Surgeon J. M. Caffyn, of 33, East Elliot
Place--who came immediately after me, declared, after making
examination, that the man must have been dead for quite two days. In his
pocket was a bottle, carefully corked, empty save for a little roll of
paper, which proved to be the addendum to the log. The coastguard said
the man must have tied up his own hands, fastening the knots with his
teeth. The fact that a coastguard was the first on board may save some
complications, later on, in the Admiralty Court; for coastguards cannot
claim the salvage which is the right of the first civilian entering on a
derelict. Already, however, the legal tongues are wagging, and one young
law student is loudly asserting that the rights of the owner are already
completely sacrificed, his property being held in contravention of the
statutes of mortmain, since the tiller, as emblemship, if not proof, of
delegated possession, is held in a _dead hand_. It is needless to say
that the dead steersman has been reverently removed from the place where
he held his honourable watch and ward till death--a steadfastness as
noble as that of the young Casabianca--and placed in the mortuary to
await inquest.

Already the sudden storm is passing, and its fierceness is abating;
crowds are scattering homeward, and the sky is beginning to redden over
the Yorkshire wolds. I shall send, in time for your next issue, further
details of the derelict ship which found her way so miraculously into
harbour in the storm.

_Whitby_

_9 August._--The sequel to the strange arrival of the derelict in the
storm last night is almost more startling than the thing itself. It
turns out that the schooner is a Russian from Varna, and is called the
_Demeter_. She is almost entirely in ballast of silver sand, with only a
small amount of cargo--a number of great wooden boxes filled with mould.
This cargo was consigned to a Whitby solicitor, Mr. S. F. Billington, of
7, The Crescent, who this morning went aboard and formally took
possession of the goods consigned to him. The Russian consul, too,
acting for the charter-party, took formal possession of the ship, and
paid all harbour dues, etc. Nothing is talked about here to-day except
the strange coincidence; the officials of the Board of Trade have been
most exacting in seeing that every compliance has been made with
existing regulations. As the matter is to be a "nine days' wonder," they
are evidently determined that there shall be no cause of after
complaint. A good deal of interest was abroad concerning the dog which
landed when the ship struck, and more than a few of the members of the
S. P. C. A., which is very strong in Whitby, have tried to befriend the
animal. To the general disappointment, however, it was not to be found;
it seems to have disappeared entirely from the town. It may be that it
was frightened and made its way on to the moors, where it is still
hiding in terror. There are some who look with dread on such a
possibility, lest later on it should in itself become a danger, for it
is evidently a fierce brute. Early this morning a large dog, a half-bred
mastiff belonging to a coal merchant close to Tate Hill Pier, was found
dead in the roadway opposite to its master's yard. It had been fighting,
and manifestly had had a savage opponent, for its throat was torn away,
and its belly was slit open as if with a savage claw.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--By the kindness of the Board of Trade inspector, I have been
permitted to look over the log-book of the _Demeter_, which was in order
up to within three days, but contained nothing of special interest
except as to facts of missing men. The greatest interest, however, is
with regard to the paper found in the bottle, which was to-day produced
at the inquest; and a more strange narrative than the two between them
unfold it has not been my lot to come across. As there is no motive for
concealment, I am permitted to use them, and accordingly send you a
rescript, simply omitting technical details of seamanship and
supercargo. It almost seems as though the captain had been seized with
some kind of mania before he had got well into blue water, and that
this had developed persistently throughout the voyage. Of course my
statement must be taken _cum grano_, since I am writing from the
dictation of a clerk of the Russian consul, who kindly translated for
me, time being short.

                         LOG OF THE "DEMETER."


_Varna to Whitby._

_Written 18 July, things so strange happening, that I shall keep
accurate note henceforth till we land._

       *       *       *       *       *

On 6 July we finished taking in cargo, silver sand and boxes of earth.
At noon set sail. East wind, fresh. Crew, five hands ... two mates,
cook, and myself (captain).

       *       *       *       *       *

On 11 July at dawn entered Bosphorus. Boarded by Turkish Customs
officers. Backsheesh. All correct. Under way at 4 p. m.

       *       *       *       *       *

On 12 July through Dardanelles. More Customs officers and flagboat of
guarding squadron. Backsheesh again. Work of officers thorough, but
quick. Want us off soon. At dark passed into Archipelago.

       *       *       *       *       *

On 13 July passed Cape Matapan. Crew dissatisfied about something.
Seemed scared, but would not speak out.

       *       *       *       *       *

On 14 July was somewhat anxious about crew. Men all steady fellows, who
sailed with me before. Mate could not make out what was wrong; they only
told him there was _something_, and crossed themselves. Mate lost temper
with one of them that day and struck him. Expected fierce quarrel, but
all was quiet.

       *       *       *       *       *

On 16 July mate reported in the morning that one of crew, Petrofsky, was
missing. Could not account for it. Took larboard watch eight bells last
night; was relieved by Abramoff, but did not go to bunk. Men more
downcast than ever. All said they expected something of the kind, but
would not say more than there was _something_ aboard. Mate getting very
impatient with them; feared some trouble ahead.

       *       *       *       *       *

On 17 July, yesterday, one of the men, Olgaren, came to my cabin, and in
an awestruck way confided to me that he thought there was a strange man
aboard the ship. He said that in his watch he had been sheltering
behind the deck-house, as there was a rain-storm, when he saw a tall,
thin man, who was not like any of the crew, come up the companion-way,
and go along the deck forward, and disappear. He followed cautiously,
but when he got to bows found no one, and the hatchways were all closed.
He was in a panic of superstitious fear, and I am afraid the panic may
spread. To allay it, I shall to-day search entire ship carefully from
stem to stern.

       *       *       *       *       *

Later in the day I got together the whole crew, and told them, as they
evidently thought there was some one in the ship, we would search from
stem to stern. First mate angry; said it was folly, and to yield to such
foolish ideas would demoralise the men; said he would engage to keep
them out of trouble with a handspike. I let him take the helm, while the
rest began thorough search, all keeping abreast, with lanterns: we left
no corner unsearched. As there were only the big wooden boxes, there
were no odd corners where a man could hide. Men much relieved when
search over, and went back to work cheerfully. First mate scowled, but
said nothing.

       *       *       *       *       *

_22 July_.--Rough weather last three days, and all hands busy with
sails--no time to be frightened. Men seem to have forgotten their dread.
Mate cheerful again, and all on good terms. Praised men for work in bad
weather. Passed Gibralter and out through Straits. All well.

       *       *       *       *       *

_24 July_.--There seems some doom over this ship. Already a hand short,
and entering on the Bay of Biscay with wild weather ahead, and yet last
night another man lost--disappeared. Like the first, he came off his
watch and was not seen again. Men all in a panic of fear; sent a round
robin, asking to have double watch, as they fear to be alone. Mate
angry. Fear there will be some trouble, as either he or the men will do
some violence.

       *       *       *       *       *

_28 July_.--Four days in hell, knocking about in a sort of maelstrom,
and the wind a tempest. No sleep for any one. Men all worn out. Hardly
know how to set a watch, since no one fit to go on. Second mate
volunteered to steer and watch, and let men snatch a few hours' sleep.
Wind abating; seas still terrific, but feel them less, as ship is
steadier.

       *       *       *       *       *

_29 July_.--Another tragedy. Had single watch to-night, as crew too
tired to double. When morning watch came on deck could find no one
except steersman. Raised outcry, and all came on deck. Thorough search,
but no one found. Are now without second mate, and crew in a panic. Mate
and I agreed to go armed henceforth and wait for any sign of cause.

       *       *       *       *       *

_30 July_.--Last night. Rejoiced we are nearing England. Weather fine,
all sails set. Retired worn out; slept soundly; awaked by mate telling
me that both man of watch and steersman missing. Only self and mate and
two hands left to work ship.

       *       *       *       *       *

_1 August_.--Two days of fog, and not a sail sighted. Had hoped when in
the English Channel to be able to signal for help or get in somewhere.
Not having power to work sails, have to run before wind. Dare not lower,
as could not raise them again. We seem to be drifting to some terrible
doom. Mate now more demoralised than either of men. His stronger nature
seems to have worked inwardly against himself. Men are beyond fear,
working stolidly and patiently, with minds made up to worst. They are
Russian, he Roumanian.

       *       *       *       *       *

_2 August, midnight_.--Woke up from few minutes' sleep by hearing a cry,
seemingly outside my port. Could see nothing in fog. Rushed on deck, and
ran against mate. Tells me heard cry and ran, but no sign of man on
watch. One more gone. Lord, help us! Mate says we must be past Straits
of Dover, as in a moment of fog lifting he saw North Foreland, just as
he heard the man cry out. If so we are now off in the North Sea, and
only God can guide us in the fog, which seems to move with us; and God
seems to have deserted us.

       *       *       *       *       *

_3 August_.--At midnight I went to relieve the man at the wheel, and
when I got to it found no one there. The wind was steady, and as we ran
before it there was no yawing. I dared not leave it, so shouted for the
mate. After a few seconds he rushed up on deck in his flannels. He
looked wild-eyed and haggard, and I greatly fear his reason has given
way. He came close to me and whispered hoarsely, with his mouth to my
ear, as though fearing the very air might hear: "_It_ is here; I know
it, now. On the watch last night I saw It, like a man, tall and thin,
and ghastly pale. It was in the bows, and looking out. I crept behind
It, and gave It my knife; but the knife went through It, empty as the
air." And as he spoke he took his knife and drove it savagely into
space. Then he went on: "But It is here, and I'll find It. It is in the
hold, perhaps in one of those boxes. I'll unscrew them one by one and
see. You work the helm." And, with a warning look and his finger on his
lip, he went below. There was springing up a choppy wind, and I could
not leave the helm. I saw him come out on deck again with a tool-chest
and a lantern, and go down the forward hatchway. He is mad, stark,
raving mad, and it's no use my trying to stop him. He can't hurt those
big boxes: they are invoiced as "clay," and to pull them about is as
harmless a thing as he can do. So here I stay, and mind the helm, and
write these notes. I can only trust in God and wait till the fog clears.
Then, if I can't steer to any harbour with the wind that is, I shall cut
down sails and lie by, and signal for help....

       *       *       *       *       *

It is nearly all over now. Just as I was beginning to hope that the mate
would come out calmer--for I heard him knocking away at something in the
hold, and work is good for him--there came up the hatchway a sudden,
startled scream, which made my blood run cold, and up on the deck he
came as if shot from a gun--a raging madman, with his eyes rolling and
his face convulsed with fear. "Save me! save me!" he cried, and then
looked round on the blanket of fog. His horror turned to despair, and in
a steady voice he said: "You had better come too, captain, before it is
too late. _He_ is there. I know the secret now. The sea will save me
from Him, and it is all that is left!" Before I could say a word, or
move forward to seize him, he sprang on the bulwark and deliberately
threw himself into the sea. I suppose I know the secret too, now. It was
this madman who had got rid of the men one by one, and now he has
followed them himself. God help me! How am I to account for all these
horrors when I get to port? _When_ I get to port! Will that ever be?

       *       *       *       *       *

_4 August._--Still fog, which the sunrise cannot pierce. I know there is
sunrise because I am a sailor, why else I know not. I dared not go
below, I dared not leave the helm; so here all night I stayed, and in
the dimness of the night I saw It--Him! God forgive me, but the mate was
right to jump overboard. It was better to die like a man; to die like a
sailor in blue water no man can object. But I am captain, and I must not
leave my ship. But I shall baffle this fiend or monster, for I shall tie
my hands to the wheel when my strength begins to fail, and along with
them I shall tie that which He--It!--dare not touch; and then, come good
wind or foul, I shall save my soul, and my honour as a captain. I am
growing weaker, and the night is coming on. If He can look me in the
face again, I may not have time to act.... If we are wrecked, mayhap
this bottle may be found, and those who find it may understand; if not,
... well, then all men shall know that I have been true to my trust. God
and the Blessed Virgin and the saints help a poor ignorant soul trying
to do his duty....

       *       *       *       *       *

Of course the verdict was an open one. There is no evidence to adduce;
and whether or not the man himself committed the murders there is now
none to say. The folk here hold almost universally that the captain is
simply a hero, and he is to be given a public funeral. Already it is
arranged that his body is to be taken with a train of boats up the Esk
for a piece and then brought back to Tate Hill Pier and up the abbey
steps; for he is to be buried in the churchyard on the cliff. The owners
of more than a hundred boats have already given in their names as
wishing to follow him to the grave.

No trace has ever been found of the great dog; at which there is much
mourning, for, with public opinion in its present state, he would, I
believe, be adopted by the town. To-morrow will see the funeral; and so
will end this one more "mystery of the sea."


_Mina Murray's Journal._

_8 August._--Lucy was very restless all night, and I, too, could not
sleep. The storm was fearful, and as it boomed loudly among the
chimney-pots, it made me shudder. When a sharp puff came it seemed to be
like a distant gun. Strangely enough, Lucy did not wake; but she got up
twice and dressed herself. Fortunately, each time I awoke in time and
managed to undress her without waking her, and got her back to bed. It
is a very strange thing, this sleep-walking, for as soon as her will is
thwarted in any physical way, her intention, if there be any,
disappears, and she yields herself almost exactly to the routine of her
life.

Early in the morning we both got up and went down to the harbour to see
if anything had happened in the night. There were very few people about,
and though the sun was bright, and the air clear and fresh, the big,
grim-looking waves, that seemed dark themselves because the foam that
topped them was like snow, forced themselves in through the narrow mouth
of the harbour--like a bullying man going through a crowd. Somehow I
felt glad that Jonathan was not on the sea last night, but on land. But,
oh, is he on land or sea? Where is he, and how? I am getting fearfully
anxious about him. If I only knew what to do, and could do anything!

       *       *       *       *       *

_10 August._--The funeral of the poor sea-captain to-day was most
touching. Every boat in the harbour seemed to be there, and the coffin
was carried by captains all the way from Tate Hill Pier up to the
churchyard. Lucy came with me, and we went early to our old seat, whilst
the cortège of boats went up the river to the Viaduct and came down
again. We had a lovely view, and saw the procession nearly all the way.
The poor fellow was laid to rest quite near our seat so that we stood on
it when the time came and saw everything. Poor Lucy seemed much upset.
She was restless and uneasy all the time, and I cannot but think that
her dreaming at night is telling on her. She is quite odd in one thing:
she will not admit to me that there is any cause for restlessness; or if
there be, she does not understand it herself. There is an additional
cause in that poor old Mr. Swales was found dead this morning on our
seat, his neck being broken. He had evidently, as the doctor said,
fallen back in the seat in some sort of fright, for there was a look of
fear and horror on his face that the men said made them shudder. Poor
dear old man! Perhaps he had seen Death with his dying eyes! Lucy is so
sweet and sensitive that she feels influences more acutely than other
people do. Just now she was quite upset by a little thing which I did
not much heed, though I am myself very fond of animals. One of the men
who came up here often to look for the boats was followed by his dog.
The dog is always with him. They are both quiet persons, and I never saw
the man angry, nor heard the dog bark. During the service the dog would
not come to its master, who was on the seat with us, but kept a few
yards off, barking and howling. Its master spoke to it gently, and then
harshly, and then angrily; but it would neither come nor cease to make a
noise. It was in a sort of fury, with its eyes savage, and all its hairs
bristling out like a cat's tail when puss is on the war-path. Finally
the man, too, got angry, and jumped down and kicked the dog, and then
took it by the scruff of the neck and half dragged and half threw it on
the tombstone on which the seat is fixed. The moment it touched the
stone the poor thing became quiet and fell all into a tremble. It did
not try to get away, but crouched down, quivering and cowering, and was
in such a pitiable state of terror that I tried, though without effect,
to comfort it. Lucy was full of pity, too, but she did not attempt to
touch the dog, but looked at it in an agonised sort of way. I greatly
fear that she is of too super-sensitive a nature to go through the world
without trouble. She will be dreaming of this to-night, I am sure. The
whole agglomeration of things--the ship steered into port by a dead
man; his attitude, tied to the wheel with a crucifix and beads; the
touching funeral; the dog, now furious and now in terror--will all
afford material for her dreams.

I think it will be best for her to go to bed tired out physically, so I
shall take her for a long walk by the cliffs to Robin Hood's Bay and
back. She ought not to have much inclination for sleep-walking then.




CHAPTER VIII

MINA MURRAY'S JOURNAL


_Same day, 11 o'clock p. m._--Oh, but I am tired! If it were not that I
had made my diary a duty I should not open it to-night. We had a lovely
walk. Lucy, after a while, was in gay spirits, owing, I think, to some
dear cows who came nosing towards us in a field close to the lighthouse,
and frightened the wits out of us. I believe we forgot everything
except, of course, personal fear, and it seemed to wipe the slate clean
and give us a fresh start. We had a capital "severe tea" at Robin Hood's
Bay in a sweet little old-fashioned inn, with a bow-window right over
the seaweed-covered rocks of the strand. I believe we should have
shocked the "New Woman" with our appetites. Men are more tolerant, bless
them! Then we walked home with some, or rather many, stoppages to rest,
and with our hearts full of a constant dread of wild bulls. Lucy was
really tired, and we intended to creep off to bed as soon as we could.
The young curate came in, however, and Mrs. Westenra asked him to stay
for supper. Lucy and I had both a fight for it with the dusty miller; I
know it was a hard fight on my part, and I am quite heroic. I think that
some day the bishops must get together and see about breeding up a new
class of curates, who don't take supper, no matter how they may be
pressed to, and who will know when girls are tired. Lucy is asleep and
breathing softly. She has more colour in her cheeks than usual, and
looks, oh, so sweet. If Mr. Holmwood fell in love with her seeing her
only in the drawing-room, I wonder what he would say if he saw her now.
Some of the "New Women" writers will some day start an idea that men and
women should be allowed to see each other asleep before proposing or
accepting. But I suppose the New Woman won't condescend in future to
accept; she will do the proposing herself. And a nice job she will make
of it, too! There's some consolation in that. I am so happy to-night,
because dear Lucy seems better. I really believe she has turned the
corner, and that we are over her troubles with dreaming. I should be
quite happy if I only knew if Jonathan.... God bless and keep him.

       *       *       *       *       *

_11 August, 3 a. m._--Diary again. No sleep now, so I may as well write.
I am too agitated to sleep. We have had such an adventure, such an
agonising experience. I fell asleep as soon as I had closed my diary....
Suddenly I became broad awake, and sat up, with a horrible sense of fear
upon me, and of some feeling of emptiness around me. The room was dark,
so I could not see Lucy's bed; I stole across and felt for her. The bed
was empty. I lit a match and found that she was not in the room. The
door was shut, but not locked, as I had left it. I feared to wake her
mother, who has been more than usually ill lately, so threw on some
clothes and got ready to look for her. As I was leaving the room it
struck me that the clothes she wore might give me some clue to her
dreaming intention. Dressing-gown would mean house; dress, outside.
Dressing-gown and dress were both in their places. "Thank God," I said
to myself, "she cannot be far, as she is only in her nightdress." I ran
downstairs and looked in the sitting-room. Not there! Then I looked in
all the other open rooms of the house, with an ever-growing fear
chilling my heart. Finally I came to the hall door and found it open. It
was not wide open, but the catch of the lock had not caught. The people
of the house are careful to lock the door every night, so I feared that
Lucy must have gone out as she was. There was no time to think of what
might happen; a vague, overmastering fear obscured all details. I took a
big, heavy shawl and ran out. The clock was striking one as I was in the
Crescent, and there was not a soul in sight. I ran along the North
Terrace, but could see no sign of the white figure which I expected. At
the edge of the West Cliff above the pier I looked across the harbour to
the East Cliff, in the hope or fear--I don't know which--of seeing Lucy
in our favourite seat. There was a bright full moon, with heavy black,
driving clouds, which threw the whole scene into a fleeting diorama of
light and shade as they sailed across. For a moment or two I could see
nothing, as the shadow of a cloud obscured St. Mary's Church and all
around it. Then as the cloud passed I could see the ruins of the abbey
coming into view; and as the edge of a narrow band of light as sharp as
a sword-cut moved along, the church and the churchyard became gradually
visible. Whatever my expectation was, it was not disappointed, for
there, on our favourite seat, the silver light of the moon struck a
half-reclining figure, snowy white. The coming of the cloud was too
quick for me to see much, for shadow shut down on light almost
immediately; but it seemed to me as though something dark stood behind
the seat where the white figure shone, and bent over it. What it was,
whether man or beast, I could not tell; I did not wait to catch another
glance, but flew down the steep steps to the pier and along by the
fish-market to the bridge, which was the only way to reach the East
Cliff. The town seemed as dead, for not a soul did I see; I rejoiced
that it was so, for I wanted no witness of poor Lucy's condition. The
time and distance seemed endless, and my knees trembled and my breath
came laboured as I toiled up the endless steps to the abbey. I must have
gone fast, and yet it seemed to me as if my feet were weighted with
lead, and as though every joint in my body were rusty. When I got almost
to the top I could see the seat and the white figure, for I was now
close enough to distinguish it even through the spells of shadow. There
was undoubtedly something, long and black, bending over the
half-reclining white figure. I called in fright, "Lucy! Lucy!" and
something raised a head, and from where I was I could see a white face
and red, gleaming eyes. Lucy did not answer, and I ran on to the
entrance of the churchyard. As I entered, the church was between me and
the seat, and for a minute or so I lost sight of her. When I came in
view again the cloud had passed, and the moonlight struck so brilliantly
that I could see Lucy half reclining with her head lying over the back
of the seat. She was quite alone, and there was not a sign of any living
thing about.

When I bent over her I could see that she was still asleep. Her lips
were parted, and she was breathing--not softly as usual with her, but in
long, heavy gasps, as though striving to get her lungs full at every
breath. As I came close, she put up her hand in her sleep and pulled the
collar of her nightdress close around her throat. Whilst she did so
there came a little shudder through her, as though she felt the cold. I
flung the warm shawl over her, and drew the edges tight round her neck,
for I dreaded lest she should get some deadly chill from the night air,
unclad as she was. I feared to wake her all at once, so, in order to
have my hands free that I might help her, I fastened the shawl at her
throat with a big safety-pin; but I must have been clumsy in my anxiety
and pinched or pricked her with it, for by-and-by, when her breathing
became quieter, she put her hand to her throat again and moaned. When I
had her carefully wrapped up I put my shoes on her feet and then began
very gently to wake her. At first she did not respond; but gradually she
became more and more uneasy in her sleep, moaning and sighing
occasionally. At last, as time was passing fast, and, for many other
reasons, I wished to get her home at once, I shook her more forcibly,
till finally she opened her eyes and awoke. She did not seem surprised
to see me, as, of course, she did not realise all at once where she was.
Lucy always wakes prettily, and even at such a time, when her body must
have been chilled with cold, and her mind somewhat appalled at waking
unclad in a churchyard at night, she did not lose her grace. She
trembled a little, and clung to me; when I told her to come at once with
me home she rose without a word, with the obedience of a child. As we
passed along, the gravel hurt my feet, and Lucy noticed me wince. She
stopped and wanted to insist upon my taking my shoes; but I would not.
However, when we got to the pathway outside the churchyard, where there
was a puddle of water, remaining from the storm, I daubed my feet with
mud, using each foot in turn on the other, so that as we went home, no
one, in case we should meet any one, should notice my bare feet.

Fortune favoured us, and we got home without meeting a soul. Once we saw
a man, who seemed not quite sober, passing along a street in front of
us; but we hid in a door till he had disappeared up an opening such as
there are here, steep little closes, or "wynds," as they call them in
Scotland. My heart beat so loud all the time that sometimes I thought I
should faint. I was filled with anxiety about Lucy, not only for her
health, lest she should suffer from the exposure, but for her reputation
in case the story should get wind. When we got in, and had washed our
feet, and had said a prayer of thankfulness together, I tucked her into
bed. Before falling asleep she asked--even implored--me not to say a
word to any one, even her mother, about her sleep-walking adventure. I
hesitated at first to promise; but on thinking of the state of her
mother's health, and how the knowledge of such a thing would fret her,
and thinking, too, of how such a story might become distorted--nay,
infallibly would--in case it should leak out, I thought it wiser to do
so. I hope I did right. I have locked the door, and the key is tied to
my wrist, so perhaps I shall not be again disturbed. Lucy is sleeping
soundly; the reflex of the dawn is high and far over the sea....

       *       *       *       *       *

_Same day, noon._--All goes well. Lucy slept till I woke her and seemed
not to have even changed her side. The adventure of the night does not
seem to have harmed her; on the contrary, it has benefited her, for she
looks better this morning than she has done for weeks. I was sorry to
notice that my clumsiness with the safety-pin hurt her. Indeed, it might
have been serious, for the skin of her throat was pierced. I must have
pinched up a piece of loose skin and have transfixed it, for there are
two little red points like pin-pricks, and on the band of her nightdress
was a drop of blood. When I apologised and was concerned about it, she
laughed and petted me, and said she did not even feel it. Fortunately it
cannot leave a scar, as it is so tiny.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Same day, night._--We passed a happy day. The air was clear, and the
sun bright, and there was a cool breeze. We took our lunch to Mulgrave
Woods, Mrs. Westenra driving by the road and Lucy and I walking by the
cliff-path and joining her at the gate. I felt a little sad myself, for
I could not but feel how _absolutely_ happy it would have been had
Jonathan been with me. But there! I must only be patient. In the evening
we strolled in the Casino Terrace, and heard some good music by Spohr
and Mackenzie, and went to bed early. Lucy seems more restful than she
has been for some time, and fell asleep at once. I shall lock the door
and secure the key the same as before, though I do not expect any
trouble to-night.

       *       *       *       *       *

_12 August._--My expectations were wrong, for twice during the night I
was wakened by Lucy trying to get out. She seemed, even in her sleep, to
be a little impatient at finding the door shut, and went back to bed
under a sort of protest. I woke with the dawn, and heard the birds
chirping outside of the window. Lucy woke, too, and, I was glad to see,
was even better than on the previous morning. All her old gaiety of
manner seemed to have come back, and she came and snuggled in beside me
and told me all about Arthur. I told her how anxious I was about
Jonathan, and then she tried to comfort me. Well, she succeeded
somewhat, for, though sympathy can't alter facts, it can help to make
them more bearable.

       *       *       *       *       *

_13 August._--Another quiet day, and to bed with the key on my wrist as
before. Again I awoke in the night, and found Lucy sitting up in bed,
still asleep, pointing to the window. I got up quietly, and pulling
aside the blind, looked out. It was brilliant moonlight, and the soft
effect of the light over the sea and sky--merged together in one great,
silent mystery--was beautiful beyond words. Between me and the moonlight
flitted a great bat, coming and going in great whirling circles. Once or
twice it came quite close, but was, I suppose, frightened at seeing me,
and flitted away across the harbour towards the abbey. When I came back
from the window Lucy had lain down again, and was sleeping peacefully.
She did not stir again all night.

       *       *       *       *       *

_14 August._--On the East Cliff, reading and writing all day. Lucy seems
to have become as much in love with the spot as I am, and it is hard to
get her away from it when it is time to come home for lunch or tea or
dinner. This afternoon she made a funny remark. We were coming home for
dinner, and had come to the top of the steps up from the West Pier and
stopped to look at the view, as we generally do. The setting sun, low
down in the sky, was just dropping behind Kettleness; the red light was
thrown over on the East Cliff and the old abbey, and seemed to bathe
everything in a beautiful rosy glow. We were silent for a while, and
suddenly Lucy murmured as if to herself:--

"His red eyes again! They are just the same." It was such an odd
expression, coming _apropos_ of nothing, that it quite startled me. I
slewed round a little, so as to see Lucy well without seeming to stare
at her, and saw that she was in a half-dreamy state, with an odd look on
her face that I could not quite make out; so I said nothing, but
followed her eyes. She appeared to be looking over at our own seat,
whereon was a dark figure seated alone. I was a little startled myself,
for it seemed for an instant as if the stranger had great eyes like
burning flames; but a second look dispelled the illusion. The red
sunlight was shining on the windows of St. Mary's Church behind our
seat, and as the sun dipped there was just sufficient change in the
refraction and reflection to make it appear as if the light moved. I
called Lucy's attention to the peculiar effect, and she became herself
with a start, but she looked sad all the same; it may have been that she
was thinking of that terrible night up there. We never refer to it; so I
said nothing, and we went home to dinner. Lucy had a headache and went
early to bed. I saw her asleep, and went out for a little stroll myself;
I walked along the cliffs to the westward, and was full of sweet
sadness, for I was thinking of Jonathan. When coming home--it was then
bright moonlight, so bright that, though the front of our part of the
Crescent was in shadow, everything could be well seen--I threw a glance
up at our window, and saw Lucy's head leaning out. I thought that
perhaps she was looking out for me, so I opened my handkerchief and
waved it. She did not notice or make any movement whatever. Just then,
the moonlight crept round an angle of the building, and the light fell
on the window. There distinctly was Lucy with her head lying up against
the side of the window-sill and her eyes shut. She was fast asleep, and
by her, seated on the window-sill, was something that looked like a
good-sized bird. I was afraid she might get a chill, so I ran upstairs,
but as I came into the room she was moving back to her bed, fast
asleep, and breathing heavily; she was holding her hand to her throat,
as though to protect it from cold.

I did not wake her, but tucked her up warmly; I have taken care that the
door is locked and the window securely fastened.

She looks so sweet as she sleeps; but she is paler than is her wont, and
there is a drawn, haggard look under her eyes which I do not like. I
fear she is fretting about something. I wish I could find out what it
is.

       *       *       *       *       *

_15 August._--Rose later than usual. Lucy was languid and tired, and
slept on after we had been called. We had a happy surprise at breakfast.
Arthur's father is better, and wants the marriage to come off soon. Lucy
is full of quiet joy, and her mother is glad and sorry at once. Later on
in the day she told me the cause. She is grieved to lose Lucy as her
very own, but she is rejoiced that she is soon to have some one to
protect her. Poor dear, sweet lady! She confided to me that she has got
her death-warrant. She has not told Lucy, and made me promise secrecy;
her doctor told her that within a few months, at most, she must die, for
her heart is weakening. At any time, even now, a sudden shock would be
almost sure to kill her. Ah, we were wise to keep from her the affair of
the dreadful night of Lucy's sleep-walking.

       *       *       *       *       *

_17 August._--No diary for two whole days. I have not had the heart to
write. Some sort of shadowy pall seems to be coming over our happiness.
No news from Jonathan, and Lucy seems to be growing weaker, whilst her
mother's hours are numbering to a close. I do not understand Lucy's
fading away as she is doing. She eats well and sleeps well, and enjoys
the fresh air; but all the time the roses in her cheeks are fading, and
she gets weaker and more languid day by day; at night I hear her gasping
as if for air. I keep the key of our door always fastened to my wrist at
night, but she gets up and walks about the room, and sits at the open
window. Last night I found her leaning out when I woke up, and when I
tried to wake her I could not; she was in a faint. When I managed to
restore her she was as weak as water, and cried silently between long,
painful struggles for breath. When I asked her how she came to be at the
window she shook her head and turned away. I trust her feeling ill may
not be from that unlucky prick of the safety-pin. I looked at her throat
just now as she lay asleep, and the tiny wounds seem not to have healed.
They are still open, and, if anything, larger than before, and the
edges of them are faintly white. They are like little white dots with
red centres. Unless they heal within a day or two, I shall insist on the
doctor seeing about them.


_Letter, Samuel F. Billington & Son, Solicitors, Whitby, to Messrs.
Carter, Paterson & Co., London._

"_17 August._

"Dear Sirs,--

"Herewith please receive invoice of goods sent by Great Northern
Railway. Same are to be delivered at Carfax, near Purfleet, immediately
on receipt at goods station King's Cross. The house is at present empty,
but enclosed please find keys, all of which are labelled.

"You will please deposit the boxes, fifty in number, which form the
consignment, in the partially ruined building forming part of the house
and marked 'A' on rough diagram enclosed. Your agent will easily
recognise the locality, as it is the ancient chapel of the mansion. The
goods leave by the train at 9:30 to-night, and will be due at King's
Cross at 4:30 to-morrow afternoon. As our client wishes the delivery
made as soon as possible, we shall be obliged by your having teams ready
at King's Cross at the time named and forthwith conveying the goods to
destination. In order to obviate any delays possible through any routine
requirements as to payment in your departments, we enclose cheque
herewith for ten pounds (£10), receipt of which please acknowledge.
Should the charge be less than this amount, you can return balance; if
greater, we shall at once send cheque for difference on hearing from
you. You are to leave the keys on coming away in the main hall of the
house, where the proprietor may get them on his entering the house by
means of his duplicate key.

"Pray do not take us as exceeding the bounds of business courtesy in
pressing you in all ways to use the utmost expedition.

_"We are, dear Sirs,

"Faithfully yours,

"SAMUEL F. BILLINGTON & SON."_


_Letter, Messrs. Carter, Paterson & Co., London, to Messrs. Billington &
Son, Whitby._

"_21 August._

"Dear Sirs,--

"We beg to acknowledge £10 received and to return cheque £1 17s. 9d,
amount of overplus, as shown in receipted account herewith. Goods are
delivered in exact accordance with instructions, and keys left in parcel
in main hall, as directed.

"We are, dear Sirs,

"Yours respectfully.

"_Pro_ CARTER, PATERSON & CO."


_Mina Murray's Journal._

_18 August._--I am happy to-day, and write sitting on the seat in the
churchyard. Lucy is ever so much better. Last night she slept well all
night, and did not disturb me once. The roses seem coming back already
to her cheeks, though she is still sadly pale and wan-looking. If she
were in any way anæmic I could understand it, but she is not. She is in
gay spirits and full of life and cheerfulness. All the morbid reticence
seems to have passed from her, and she has just reminded me, as if I
needed any reminding, of _that_ night, and that it was here, on this
very seat, I found her asleep. As she told me she tapped playfully with
the heel of her boot on the stone slab and said:--

"My poor little feet didn't make much noise then! I daresay poor old Mr.
Swales would have told me that it was because I didn't want to wake up
Geordie." As she was in such a communicative humour, I asked her if she
had dreamed at all that night. Before she answered, that sweet, puckered
look came into her forehead, which Arthur--I call him Arthur from her
habit--says he loves; and, indeed, I don't wonder that he does. Then she
went on in a half-dreaming kind of way, as if trying to recall it to
herself:--

"I didn't quite dream; but it all seemed to be real. I only wanted to be
here in this spot--I don't know why, for I was afraid of something--I
don't know what. I remember, though I suppose I was asleep, passing
through the streets and over the bridge. A fish leaped as I went by, and
I leaned over to look at it, and I heard a lot of dogs howling--the
whole town seemed as if it must be full of dogs all howling at once--as
I went up the steps. Then I had a vague memory of something long and
dark with red eyes, just as we saw in the sunset, and something very
sweet and very bitter all around me at once; and then I seemed sinking
into deep green water, and there was a singing in my ears, as I have
heard there is to drowning men; and then everything seemed passing away
from me; my soul seemed to go out from my body and float about the air.
I seem to remember that once the West Lighthouse was right under me,
and then there was a sort of agonising feeling, as if I were in an
earthquake, and I came back and found you shaking my body. I saw you do
it before I felt you."

Then she began to laugh. It seemed a little uncanny to me, and I
listened to her breathlessly. I did not quite like it, and thought it
better not to keep her mind on the subject, so we drifted on to other
subjects, and Lucy was like her old self again. When we got home the
fresh breeze had braced her up, and her pale cheeks were really more
rosy. Her mother rejoiced when she saw her, and we all spent a very
happy evening together.

       *       *       *       *       *

_19 August._--Joy, joy, joy! although not all joy. At last, news of
Jonathan. The dear fellow has been ill; that is why he did not write. I
am not afraid to think it or say it, now that I know. Mr. Hawkins sent
me on the letter, and wrote himself, oh, so kindly. I am to leave in the
morning and go over to Jonathan, and to help to nurse him if necessary,
and to bring him home. Mr. Hawkins says it would not be a bad thing if
we were to be married out there. I have cried over the good Sister's
letter till I can feel it wet against my bosom, where it lies. It is of
Jonathan, and must be next my heart, for he is _in_ my heart. My journey
is all mapped out, and my luggage ready. I am only taking one change of
dress; Lucy will bring my trunk to London and keep it till I send for
it, for it may be that ... I must write no more; I must keep it to say
to Jonathan, my husband. The letter that he has seen and touched must
comfort me till we meet.


_Letter, Sister Agatha, Hospital of St. Joseph and Ste. Mary,
Buda-Pesth, to Miss Wilhelmina Murray._

"_12 August._

"Dear Madam,--

"I write by desire of Mr. Jonathan Harker, who is himself not strong
enough to write, though progressing well, thanks to God and St. Joseph
and Ste. Mary. He has been under our care for nearly six weeks,
suffering from a violent brain fever. He wishes me to convey his love,
and to say that by this post I write for him to Mr. Peter Hawkins,
Exeter, to say, with his dutiful respects, that he is sorry for his
delay, and that all of his work is completed. He will require some few
weeks' rest in our sanatorium in the hills, but will then return. He
wishes me to say that he has not sufficient money with him, and that he
would like to pay for his staying here, so that others who need shall
not be wanting for help.

"Believe me,

"Yours, with sympathy and all blessings,

"SISTER AGATHA.

"P. S.--My patient being asleep, I open this to let you know something
more. He has told me all about you, and that you are shortly to be his
wife. All blessings to you both! He has had some fearful shock--so says
our doctor--and in his delirium his ravings have been dreadful; of
wolves and poison and blood; of ghosts and demons; and I fear to say of
what. Be careful with him always that there may be nothing to excite him
of this kind for a long time to come; the traces of such an illness as
his do not lightly die away. We should have written long ago, but we
knew nothing of his friends, and there was on him nothing that any one
could understand. He came in the train from Klausenburg, and the guard
was told by the station-master there that he rushed into the station
shouting for a ticket for home. Seeing from his violent demeanour that
he was English, they gave him a ticket for the furthest station on the
way thither that the train reached.

"Be assured that he is well cared for. He has won all hearts by his
sweetness and gentleness. He is truly getting on well, and I have no
doubt will in a few weeks be all himself. But be careful of him for
safety's sake. There are, I pray God and St. Joseph and Ste. Mary, many,
many, happy years for you both."


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_19 August._--Strange and sudden change in Renfield last night. About
eight o'clock he began to get excited and sniff about as a dog does when
setting. The attendant was struck by his manner, and knowing my interest
in him, encouraged him to talk. He is usually respectful to the
attendant and at times servile; but to-night, the man tells me, he was
quite haughty. Would not condescend to talk with him at all. All he
would say was:--

     "I don't want to talk to you: you don't count now; the Master is at
     hand."

The attendant thinks it is some sudden form of religious mania which has
seized him. If so, we must look out for squalls, for a strong man with
homicidal and religious mania at once might be dangerous. The
combination is a dreadful one. At nine o'clock I visited him myself. His
attitude to me was the same as that to the attendant; in his sublime
self-feeling the difference between myself and attendant seemed to him
as nothing. It looks like religious mania, and he will soon think that
he himself is God. These infinitesimal distinctions between man and man
are too paltry for an Omnipotent Being. How these madmen give themselves
away! The real God taketh heed lest a sparrow fall; but the God created
from human vanity sees no difference between an eagle and a sparrow. Oh,
if men only knew!

For half an hour or more Renfield kept getting excited in greater and
greater degree. I did not pretend to be watching him, but I kept strict
observation all the same. All at once that shifty look came into his
eyes which we always see when a madman has seized an idea, and with it
the shifty movement of the head and back which asylum attendants come to
know so well. He became quite quiet, and went and sat on the edge of his
bed resignedly, and looked into space with lack-lustre eyes. I thought I
would find out if his apathy were real or only assumed, and tried to
lead him to talk of his pets, a theme which had never failed to excite
his attention. At first he made no reply, but at length said testily:--

"Bother them all! I don't care a pin about them."

"What?" I said. "You don't mean to tell me you don't care about
spiders?" (Spiders at present are his hobby and the note-book is filling
up with columns of small figures.) To this he answered enigmatically:--

"The bride-maidens rejoice the eyes that wait the coming of the bride;
but when the bride draweth nigh, then the maidens shine not to the eyes
that are filled."

He would not explain himself, but remained obstinately seated on his bed
all the time I remained with him.

I am weary to-night and low in spirits. I cannot but think of Lucy, and
how different things might have been. If I don't sleep at once, chloral,
the modern Morpheus--C_{2}HCl_{3}O. H_{2}O! I must be careful not to let
it grow into a habit. No, I shall take none to-night! I have thought of
Lucy, and I shall not dishonour her by mixing the two. If need be,
to-night shall be sleepless....

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Glad I made the resolution; gladder that I kept to it. I had
lain tossing about, and had heard the clock strike only twice, when the
night-watchman came to me, sent up from the ward, to say that Renfield
had escaped. I threw on my clothes and ran down at once; my patient is
too dangerous a person to be roaming about. Those ideas of his might
work out dangerously with strangers. The attendant was waiting for me.
He said he had seen him not ten minutes before, seemingly asleep in his
bed, when he had looked through the observation-trap in the door. His
attention was called by the sound of the window being wrenched out. He
ran back and saw his feet disappear through the window, and had at once
sent up for me. He was only in his night-gear, and cannot be far off.
The attendant thought it would be more useful to watch where he should
go than to follow him, as he might lose sight of him whilst getting out
of the building by the door. He is a bulky man, and couldn't get through
the window. I am thin, so, with his aid, I got out, but feet foremost,
and, as we were only a few feet above ground, landed unhurt. The
attendant told me the patient had gone to the left, and had taken a
straight line, so I ran as quickly as I could. As I got through the belt
of trees I saw a white figure scale the high wall which separates our
grounds from those of the deserted house.

I ran back at once, told the watchman to get three or four men
immediately and follow me into the grounds of Carfax, in case our friend
might be dangerous. I got a ladder myself, and crossing the wall,
dropped down on the other side. I could see Renfield's figure just
disappearing behind the angle of the house, so I ran after him. On the
far side of the house I found him pressed close against the old
ironbound oak door of the chapel. He was talking, apparently to some
one, but I was afraid to go near enough to hear what he was saying, lest
I might frighten him, and he should run off. Chasing an errant swarm of
bees is nothing to following a naked lunatic, when the fit of escaping
is upon him! After a few minutes, however, I could see that he did not
take note of anything around him, and so ventured to draw nearer to
him--the more so as my men had now crossed the wall and were closing him
in. I heard him say:--

"I am here to do Your bidding, Master. I am Your slave, and You will
reward me, for I shall be faithful. I have worshipped You long and afar
off. Now that You are near, I await Your commands, and You will not pass
me by, will You, dear Master, in Your distribution of good things?"

He _is_ a selfish old beggar anyhow. He thinks of the loaves and fishes
even when he believes he is in a Real Presence. His manias make a
startling combination. When we closed in on him he fought like a tiger.
He is immensely strong, for he was more like a wild beast than a man. I
never saw a lunatic in such a paroxysm of rage before; and I hope I
shall not again. It is a mercy that we have found out his strength and
his danger in good time. With strength and determination like his, he
might have done wild work before he was caged. He is safe now at any
rate. Jack Sheppard himself couldn't get free from the strait-waistcoat
that keeps him restrained, and he's chained to the wall in the padded
room. His cries are at times awful, but the silences that follow are
more deadly still, for he means murder in every turn and movement.

Just now he spoke coherent words for the first time:--

"I shall be patient, Master. It is coming--coming--coming!"

So I took the hint, and came too. I was too excited to sleep, but this
diary has quieted me, and I feel I shall get some sleep to-night.




CHAPTER IX


_Letter, Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra._

"_Buda-Pesth, 24 August._

"My dearest Lucy,--

"I know you will be anxious to hear all that has happened since we
parted at the railway station at Whitby. Well, my dear, I got to Hull
all right, and caught the boat to Hamburg, and then the train on here. I
feel that I can hardly recall anything of the journey, except that I
knew I was coming to Jonathan, and, that as I should have to do some
nursing, I had better get all the sleep I could.... I found my dear one,
oh, so thin and pale and weak-looking. All the resolution has gone out
of his dear eyes, and that quiet dignity which I told you was in his
face has vanished. He is only a wreck of himself, and he does not
remember anything that has happened to him for a long time past. At
least, he wants me to believe so, and I shall never ask. He has had some
terrible shock, and I fear it might tax his poor brain if he were to try
to recall it. Sister Agatha, who is a good creature and a born nurse,
tells me that he raved of dreadful things whilst he was off his head. I
wanted her to tell me what they were; but she would only cross herself,
and say she would never tell; that the ravings of the sick were the
secrets of God, and that if a nurse through her vocation should hear
them, she should respect her trust. She is a sweet, good soul, and the
next day, when she saw I was troubled, she opened up the subject again,
and after saying that she could never mention what my poor dear raved
about, added: 'I can tell you this much, my dear: that it was not about
anything which he has done wrong himself; and you, as his wife to be,
have no cause to be concerned. He has not forgotten you or what he owes
to you. His fear was of great and terrible things, which no mortal can
treat of.' I do believe the dear soul thought I might be jealous lest my
poor dear should have fallen in love with any other girl. The idea of
_my_ being jealous about Jonathan! And yet, my dear, let me whisper, I
felt a thrill of joy through me when I _knew_ that no other woman was a
cause of trouble. I am now sitting by his bedside, where I can see his
face while he sleeps. He is waking!...

"When he woke he asked me for his coat, as he wanted to get something
from the pocket; I asked Sister Agatha, and she brought all his things.
I saw that amongst them was his note-book, and was going to ask him to
let me look at it--for I knew then that I might find some clue to his
trouble--but I suppose he must have seen my wish in my eyes, for he sent
me over to the window, saying he wanted to be quite alone for a moment.
Then he called me back, and when I came he had his hand over the
note-book, and he said to me very solemnly:--

"'Wilhelmina'--I knew then that he was in deadly earnest, for he has
never called me by that name since he asked me to marry him--'you know,
dear, my ideas of the trust between husband and wife: there should be no
secret, no concealment. I have had a great shock, and when I try to
think of what it is I feel my head spin round, and I do not know if it
was all real or the dreaming of a madman. You know I have had brain
fever, and that is to be mad. The secret is here, and I do not want to
know it. I want to take up my life here, with our marriage.' For, my
dear, we had decided to be married as soon as the formalities are
complete. 'Are you willing, Wilhelmina, to share my ignorance? Here is
the book. Take it and keep it, read it if you will, but never let me
know; unless, indeed, some solemn duty should come upon me to go back to
the bitter hours, asleep or awake, sane or mad, recorded here.' He fell
back exhausted, and I put the book under his pillow, and kissed him. I
have asked Sister Agatha to beg the Superior to let our wedding be this
afternoon, and am waiting her reply....

       *       *       *       *       *

"She has come and told me that the chaplain of the English mission
church has been sent for. We are to be married in an hour, or as soon
after as Jonathan awakes....

       *       *       *       *       *

"Lucy, the time has come and gone. I feel very solemn, but very, very
happy. Jonathan woke a little after the hour, and all was ready, and he
sat up in bed, propped up with pillows. He answered his 'I will' firmly
and strongly. I could hardly speak; my heart was so full that even those
words seemed to choke me. The dear sisters were so kind. Please God, I
shall never, never forget them, nor the grave and sweet responsibilities
I have taken upon me. I must tell you of my wedding present. When the
chaplain and the sisters had left me alone with my husband--oh, Lucy, it
is the first time I have written the words 'my husband'--left me alone
with my husband, I took the book from under his pillow, and wrapped it
up in white paper, and tied it with a little bit of pale blue ribbon
which was round my neck, and sealed it over the knot with sealing-wax,
and for my seal I used my wedding ring. Then I kissed it and showed it
to my husband, and told him that I would keep it so, and then it would
be an outward and visible sign for us all our lives that we trusted each
other; that I would never open it unless it were for his own dear sake
or for the sake of some stern duty. Then he took my hand in his, and oh,
Lucy, it was the first time he took _his wife's_ hand, and said that it
was the dearest thing in all the wide world, and that he would go
through all the past again to win it, if need be. The poor dear meant to
have said a part of the past, but he cannot think of time yet, and I
shall not wonder if at first he mixes up not only the month, but the
year.

"Well, my dear, what could I say? I could only tell him that I was the
happiest woman in all the wide world, and that I had nothing to give him
except myself, my life, and my trust, and that with these went my love
and duty for all the days of my life. And, my dear, when he kissed me,
and drew me to him with his poor weak hands, it was like a very solemn
pledge between us....

"Lucy dear, do you know why I tell you all this? It is not only because
it is all sweet to me, but because you have been, and are, very dear to
me. It was my privilege to be your friend and guide when you came from
the schoolroom to prepare for the world of life. I want you to see now,
and with the eyes of a very happy wife, whither duty has led me; so that
in your own married life you too may be all happy as I am. My dear,
please Almighty God, your life may be all it promises: a long day of
sunshine, with no harsh wind, no forgetting duty, no distrust. I must
not wish you no pain, for that can never be; but I do hope you will be
_always_ as happy as I am _now_. Good-bye, my dear. I shall post this at
once, and, perhaps, write you very soon again. I must stop, for Jonathan
is waking--I must attend to my husband!

"Your ever-loving

"MINA HARKER."


_Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Harker._

"_Whitby, 30 August._

"My dearest Mina,--

"Oceans of love and millions of kisses, and may you soon be in your own
home with your husband. I wish you could be coming home soon enough to
stay with us here. The strong air would soon restore Jonathan; it has
quite restored me. I have an appetite like a cormorant, am full of
life, and sleep well. You will be glad to know that I have quite given
up walking in my sleep. I think I have not stirred out of my bed for a
week, that is when I once got into it at night. Arthur says I am getting
fat. By the way, I forgot to tell you that Arthur is here. We have such
walks and drives, and rides, and rowing, and tennis, and fishing
together; and I love him more than ever. He _tells_ me that he loves me
more, but I doubt that, for at first he told me that he couldn't love me
more than he did then. But this is nonsense. There he is, calling to me.
So no more just at present from your loving

"LUCY.

"P. S.--Mother sends her love. She seems better, poor dear. "P. P.
S.--We are to be married on 28 September."


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_20 August._--The case of Renfield grows even more interesting. He has
now so far quieted that there are spells of cessation from his passion.
For the first week after his attack he was perpetually violent. Then one
night, just as the moon rose, he grew quiet, and kept murmuring to
himself: "Now I can wait; now I can wait." The attendant came to tell
me, so I ran down at once to have a look at him. He was still in the
strait-waistcoat and in the padded room, but the suffused look had gone
from his face, and his eyes had something of their old pleading--I might
almost say, "cringing"--softness. I was satisfied with his present
condition, and directed him to be relieved. The attendants hesitated,
but finally carried out my wishes without protest. It was a strange
thing that the patient had humour enough to see their distrust, for,
coming close to me, he said in a whisper, all the while looking
furtively at them:--

"They think I could hurt you! Fancy _me_ hurting _you_! The fools!"

It was soothing, somehow, to the feelings to find myself dissociated
even in the mind of this poor madman from the others; but all the same I
do not follow his thought. Am I to take it that I have anything in
common with him, so that we are, as it were, to stand together; or has
he to gain from me some good so stupendous that my well-being is needful
to him? I must find out later on. To-night he will not speak. Even the
offer of a kitten or even a full-grown cat will not tempt him. He will
only say: "I don't take any stock in cats. I have more to think of now,
and I can wait; I can wait."

After a while I left him. The attendant tells me that he was quiet
until just before dawn, and that then he began to get uneasy, and at
length violent, until at last he fell into a paroxysm which exhausted
him so that he swooned into a sort of coma.

       *       *       *       *       *

... Three nights has the same thing happened--violent all day then quiet
from moonrise to sunrise. I wish I could get some clue to the cause. It
would almost seem as if there was some influence which came and went.
Happy thought! We shall to-night play sane wits against mad ones. He
escaped before without our help; to-night he shall escape with it. We
shall give him a chance, and have the men ready to follow in case they
are required....

       *       *       *       *       *

_23 August._--"The unexpected always happens." How well Disraeli knew
life. Our bird when he found the cage open would not fly, so all our
subtle arrangements were for nought. At any rate, we have proved one
thing; that the spells of quietness last a reasonable time. We shall in
future be able to ease his bonds for a few hours each day. I have given
orders to the night attendant merely to shut him in the padded room,
when once he is quiet, until an hour before sunrise. The poor soul's
body will enjoy the relief even if his mind cannot appreciate it. Hark!
The unexpected again! I am called; the patient has once more escaped.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Another night adventure. Renfield artfully waited until the
attendant was entering the room to inspect. Then he dashed out past him
and flew down the passage. I sent word for the attendants to follow.
Again he went into the grounds of the deserted house, and we found him
in the same place, pressed against the old chapel door. When he saw me
he became furious, and had not the attendants seized him in time, he
would have tried to kill me. As we were holding him a strange thing
happened. He suddenly redoubled his efforts, and then as suddenly grew
calm. I looked round instinctively, but could see nothing. Then I caught
the patient's eye and followed it, but could trace nothing as it looked
into the moonlit sky except a big bat, which was flapping its silent and
ghostly way to the west. Bats usually wheel and flit about, but this one
seemed to go straight on, as if it knew where it was bound for or had
some intention of its own. The patient grew calmer every instant, and
presently said:--

"You needn't tie me; I shall go quietly!" Without trouble we came back
to the house. I feel there is something ominous in his calm, and shall
not forget this night....


_Lucy Westenra's Diary_

_Hillingham, 24 August._--I must imitate Mina, and keep writing things
down. Then we can have long talks when we do meet. I wonder when it will
be. I wish she were with me again, for I feel so unhappy. Last night I
seemed to be dreaming again just as I was at Whitby. Perhaps it is the
change of air, or getting home again. It is all dark and horrid to me,
for I can remember nothing; but I am full of vague fear, and I feel so
weak and worn out. When Arthur came to lunch he looked quite grieved
when he saw me, and I hadn't the spirit to try to be cheerful. I wonder
if I could sleep in mother's room to-night. I shall make an excuse and
try.

       *       *       *       *       *

_25 August._--Another bad night. Mother did not seem to take to my
proposal. She seems not too well herself, and doubtless she fears to
worry me. I tried to keep awake, and succeeded for a while; but when the
clock struck twelve it waked me from a doze, so I must have been falling
asleep. There was a sort of scratching or flapping at the window, but I
did not mind it, and as I remember no more, I suppose I must then have
fallen asleep. More bad dreams. I wish I could remember them. This
morning I am horribly weak. My face is ghastly pale, and my throat pains
me. It must be something wrong with my lungs, for I don't seem ever to
get air enough. I shall try to cheer up when Arthur comes, or else I
know he will be miserable to see me so.


_Letter, Arthur Holmwood to Dr. Seward._

"_Albemarle Hotel, 31 August._

"My dear Jack,--

"I want you to do me a favour. Lucy is ill; that is, she has no special
disease, but she looks awful, and is getting worse every day. I have
asked her if there is any cause; I do not dare to ask her mother, for to
disturb the poor lady's mind about her daughter in her present state of
health would be fatal. Mrs. Westenra has confided to me that her doom is
spoken--disease of the heart--though poor Lucy does not know it yet. I
am sure that there is something preying on my dear girl's mind. I am
almost distracted when I think of her; to look at her gives me a pang. I
told her I should ask you to see her, and though she demurred at
first--I know why, old fellow--she finally consented. It will be a
painful task for you, I know, old friend, but it is for _her_ sake, and
I must not hesitate to ask, or you to act. You are to come to lunch at
Hillingham to-morrow, two o'clock, so as not to arouse any suspicion in
Mrs. Westenra, and after lunch Lucy will take an opportunity of being
alone with you. I shall come in for tea, and we can go away together; I
am filled with anxiety, and want to consult with you alone as soon as I
can after you have seen her. Do not fail!

"ARTHUR."


_Telegram, Arthur Holmwood to Seward._

"_1 September._

"Am summoned to see my father, who is worse. Am writing. Write me fully
by to-night's post to Ring. Wire me if necessary."


_Letter from Dr. Seward to Arthur Holmwood._

"_2 September._

"My dear old fellow,--

"With regard to Miss Westenra's health I hasten to let you know at once
that in my opinion there is not any functional disturbance or any malady
that I know of. At the same time, I am not by any means satisfied with
her appearance; she is woefully different from what she was when I saw
her last. Of course you must bear in mind that I did not have full
opportunity of examination such as I should wish; our very friendship
makes a little difficulty which not even medical science or custom can
bridge over. I had better tell you exactly what happened, leaving you to
draw, in a measure, your own conclusions. I shall then say what I have
done and propose doing.

"I found Miss Westenra in seemingly gay spirits. Her mother was present,
and in a few seconds I made up my mind that she was trying all she knew
to mislead her mother and prevent her from being anxious. I have no
doubt she guesses, if she does not know, what need of caution there is.
We lunched alone, and as we all exerted ourselves to be cheerful, we
got, as some kind of reward for our labours, some real cheerfulness
amongst us. Then Mrs. Westenra went to lie down, and Lucy was left with
me. We went into her boudoir, and till we got there her gaiety remained,
for the servants were coming and going. As soon as the door was closed,
however, the mask fell from her face, and she sank down into a chair
with a great sigh, and hid her eyes with her hand. When I saw that her
high spirits had failed, I at once took advantage of her reaction to
make a diagnosis. She said to me very sweetly:--

"'I cannot tell you how I loathe talking about myself.' I reminded her
that a doctor's confidence was sacred, but that you were grievously
anxious about her. She caught on to my meaning at once, and settled that
matter in a word. 'Tell Arthur everything you choose. I do not care for
myself, but all for him!' So I am quite free.

"I could easily see that she is somewhat bloodless, but I could not see
the usual anæmic signs, and by a chance I was actually able to test the
quality of her blood, for in opening a window which was stiff a cord
gave way, and she cut her hand slightly with broken glass. It was a
slight matter in itself, but it gave me an evident chance, and I secured
a few drops of the blood and have analysed them. The qualitative
analysis gives a quite normal condition, and shows, I should infer, in
itself a vigorous state of health. In other physical matters I was quite
satisfied that there is no need for anxiety; but as there must be a
cause somewhere, I have come to the conclusion that it must be something
mental. She complains of difficulty in breathing satisfactorily at
times, and of heavy, lethargic sleep, with dreams that frighten her, but
regarding which she can remember nothing. She says that as a child she
used to walk in her sleep, and that when in Whitby the habit came back,
and that once she walked out in the night and went to East Cliff, where
Miss Murray found her; but she assures me that of late the habit has not
returned. I am in doubt, and so have done the best thing I know of; I
have written to my old friend and master, Professor Van Helsing, of
Amsterdam, who knows as much about obscure diseases as any one in the
world. I have asked him to come over, and as you told me that all things
were to be at your charge, I have mentioned to him who you are and your
relations to Miss Westenra. This, my dear fellow, is in obedience to
your wishes, for I am only too proud and happy to do anything I can for
her. Van Helsing would, I know, do anything for me for a personal
reason, so, no matter on what ground he comes, we must accept his
wishes. He is a seemingly arbitrary man, but this is because he knows
what he is talking about better than any one else. He is a philosopher
and a metaphysician, and one of the most advanced scientists of his day;
and he has, I believe, an absolutely open mind. This, with an iron
nerve, a temper of the ice-brook, an indomitable resolution,
self-command, and toleration exalted from virtues to blessings, and the
kindliest and truest heart that beats--these form his equipment for the
noble work that he is doing for mankind--work both in theory and
practice, for his views are as wide as his all-embracing sympathy. I
tell you these facts that you may know why I have such confidence in
him. I have asked him to come at once. I shall see Miss Westenra
to-morrow again. She is to meet me at the Stores, so that I may not
alarm her mother by too early a repetition of my call.

"Yours always,

"JOHN SEWARD."


_Letter, Abraham Van Helsing, M. D., D. Ph., D. Lit., etc., etc., to Dr.
Seward._

"_2 September._

"My good Friend,--

"When I have received your letter I am already coming to you. By good
fortune I can leave just at once, without wrong to any of those who have
trusted me. Were fortune other, then it were bad for those who have
trusted, for I come to my friend when he call me to aid those he holds
dear. Tell your friend that when that time you suck from my wound so
swiftly the poison of the gangrene from that knife that our other
friend, too nervous, let slip, you did more for him when he wants my
aids and you call for them than all his great fortune could do. But it
is pleasure added to do for him, your friend; it is to you that I come.
Have then rooms for me at the Great Eastern Hotel, so that I may be near
to hand, and please it so arrange that we may see the young lady not too
late on to-morrow, for it is likely that I may have to return here that
night. But if need be I shall come again in three days, and stay longer
if it must. Till then good-bye, my friend John.

 "VAN HELSING."


_Letter, Dr. Seward to Hon. Arthur Holmwood._

"_3 September._

"My dear Art,--

"Van Helsing has come and gone. He came on with me to Hillingham, and
found that, by Lucy's discretion, her mother was lunching out, so that
we were alone with her. Van Helsing made a very careful examination of
the patient. He is to report to me, and I shall advise you, for of
course I was not present all the time. He is, I fear, much concerned,
but says he must think. When I told him of our friendship and how you
trust to me in the matter, he said: 'You must tell him all you think.
Tell him what I think, if you can guess it, if you will. Nay, I am not
jesting. This is no jest, but life and death, perhaps more.' I asked
what he meant by that, for he was very serious. This was when we had
come back to town, and he was having a cup of tea before starting on his
return to Amsterdam. He would not give me any further clue. You must not
be angry with me, Art, because his very reticence means that all his
brains are working for her good. He will speak plainly enough when the
time comes, be sure. So I told him I would simply write an account of
our visit, just as if I were doing a descriptive special article for
_The Daily Telegraph_. He seemed not to notice, but remarked that the
smuts in London were not quite so bad as they used to be when he was a
student here. I am to get his report to-morrow if he can possibly make
it. In any case I am to have a letter.

"Well, as to the visit. Lucy was more cheerful than on the day I first
saw her, and certainly looked better. She had lost something of the
ghastly look that so upset you, and her breathing was normal. She was
very sweet to the professor (as she always is), and tried to make him
feel at ease; though I could see that the poor girl was making a hard
struggle for it. I believe Van Helsing saw it, too, for I saw the quick
look under his bushy brows that I knew of old. Then he began to chat of
all things except ourselves and diseases and with such an infinite
geniality that I could see poor Lucy's pretense of animation merge into
reality. Then, without any seeming change, he brought the conversation
gently round to his visit, and suavely said:--

"'My dear young miss, I have the so great pleasure because you are so
much beloved. That is much, my dear, ever were there that which I do not
see. They told me you were down in the spirit, and that you were of a
ghastly pale. To them I say: "Pouf!"' And he snapped his fingers at me
and went on: 'But you and I shall show them how wrong they are. How can
he'--and he pointed at me with the same look and gesture as that with
which once he pointed me out to his class, on, or rather after, a
particular occasion which he never fails to remind me of--'know anything
of a young ladies? He has his madams to play with, and to bring them
back to happiness, and to those that love them. It is much to do, and,
oh, but there are rewards, in that we can bestow such happiness. But the
young ladies! He has no wife nor daughter, and the young do not tell
themselves to the young, but to the old, like me, who have known so many
sorrows and the causes of them. So, my dear, we will send him away to
smoke the cigarette in the garden, whiles you and I have little talk all
to ourselves.' I took the hint, and strolled about, and presently the
professor came to the window and called me in. He looked grave, but
said: 'I have made careful examination, but there is no functional
cause. With you I agree that there has been much blood lost; it has
been, but is not. But the conditions of her are in no way anæmic. I have
asked her to send me her maid, that I may ask just one or two question,
that so I may not chance to miss nothing. I know well what she will say.
And yet there is cause; there is always cause for everything. I must go
back home and think. You must send to me the telegram every day; and if
there be cause I shall come again. The disease--for not to be all well
is a disease--interest me, and the sweet young dear, she interest me
too. She charm me, and for her, if not for you or disease, I come.'

"As I tell you, he would not say a word more, even when we were alone.
And so now, Art, you know all I know. I shall keep stern watch. I trust
your poor father is rallying. It must be a terrible thing to you, my
dear old fellow, to be placed in such a position between two people who
are both so dear to you. I know your idea of duty to your father, and
you are right to stick to it; but, if need be, I shall send you word to
come at once to Lucy; so do not be over-anxious unless you hear from
me."


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_4 September._--Zoöphagous patient still keeps up our interest in him.
He had only one outburst and that was yesterday at an unusual time. Just
before the stroke of noon he began to grow restless. The attendant knew
the symptoms, and at once summoned aid. Fortunately the men came at a
run, and were just in time, for at the stroke of noon he became so
violent that it took all their strength to hold him. In about five
minutes, however, he began to get more and more quiet, and finally sank
into a sort of melancholy, in which state he has remained up to now. The
attendant tells me that his screams whilst in the paroxysm were really
appalling; I found my hands full when I got in, attending to some of the
other patients who were frightened by him. Indeed, I can quite
understand the effect, for the sounds disturbed even me, though I was
some distance away. It is now after the dinner-hour of the asylum, and
as yet my patient sits in a corner brooding, with a dull, sullen,
woe-begone look in his face, which seems rather to indicate than to show
something directly. I cannot quite understand it.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Another change in my patient. At five o'clock I looked in on
him, and found him seemingly as happy and contented as he used to be. He
was catching flies and eating them, and was keeping note of his capture
by making nail-marks on the edge of the door between the ridges of
padding. When he saw me, he came over and apologised for his bad
conduct, and asked me in a very humble, cringing way to be led back to
his own room and to have his note-book again. I thought it well to
humour him: so he is back in his room with the window open. He has the
sugar of his tea spread out on the window-sill, and is reaping quite a
harvest of flies. He is not now eating them, but putting them into a
box, as of old, and is already examining the corners of his room to find
a spider. I tried to get him to talk about the past few days, for any
clue to his thoughts would be of immense help to me; but he would not
rise. For a moment or two he looked very sad, and said in a sort of
far-away voice, as though saying it rather to himself than to me:--

"All over! all over! He has deserted me. No hope for me now unless I do
it for myself!" Then suddenly turning to me in a resolute way, he said:
"Doctor, won't you be very good to me and let me have a little more
sugar? I think it would be good for me."

"And the flies?" I said.

"Yes! The flies like it, too, and I like the flies; therefore I like
it." And there are people who know so little as to think that madmen do
not argue. I procured him a double supply, and left him as happy a man
as, I suppose, any in the world. I wish I could fathom his mind.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Midnight._--Another change in him. I had been to see Miss Westenra,
whom I found much better, and had just returned, and was standing at our
own gate looking at the sunset, when once more I heard him yelling. As
his room is on this side of the house, I could hear it better than in
the morning. It was a shock to me to turn from the wonderful smoky
beauty of a sunset over London, with its lurid lights and inky shadows
and all the marvellous tints that come on foul clouds even as on foul
water, and to realise all the grim sternness of my own cold stone
building, with its wealth of breathing misery, and my own desolate heart
to endure it all. I reached him just as the sun was going down, and from
his window saw the red disc sink. As it sank he became less and less
frenzied; and just as it dipped he slid from the hands that held him, an
inert mass, on the floor. It is wonderful, however, what intellectual
recuperative power lunatics have, for within a few minutes he stood up
quite calmly and looked around him. I signalled to the attendants not to
hold him, for I was anxious to see what he would do. He went straight
over to the window and brushed out the crumbs of sugar; then he took his
fly-box, and emptied it outside, and threw away the box; then he shut
the window, and crossing over, sat down on his bed. All this surprised
me, so I asked him: "Are you not going to keep flies any more?"

"No," said he; "I am sick of all that rubbish!" He certainly is a
wonderfully interesting study. I wish I could get some glimpse of his
mind or of the cause of his sudden passion. Stop; there may be a clue
after all, if we can find why to-day his paroxysms came on at high noon
and at sunset. Can it be that there is a malign influence of the sun at
periods which affects certain natures--as at times the moon does others?
We shall see.


_Telegram, Seward, London, to Van Helsing, Amsterdam._

"_4 September._--Patient still better to-day."


_Telegram, Seward, London, to Van Helsing, Amsterdam._

"_5 September._--Patient greatly improved. Good appetite; sleeps
naturally; good spirits; colour coming back."


_Telegram, Seward, London, to Van Helsing, Amsterdam._

"_6 September._--Terrible change for the worse. Come at once; do not
lose an hour. I hold over telegram to Holmwood till have seen you."




CHAPTER X


_Letter, Dr. Seward to Hon. Arthur Holmwood._

"_6 September._

"My dear Art,--

"My news to-day is not so good. Lucy this morning had gone back a bit.
There is, however, one good thing which has arisen from it; Mrs.
Westenra was naturally anxious concerning Lucy, and has consulted me
professionally about her. I took advantage of the opportunity, and told
her that my old master, Van Helsing, the great specialist, was coming to
stay with me, and that I would put her in his charge conjointly with
myself; so now we can come and go without alarming her unduly, for a
shock to her would mean sudden death, and this, in Lucy's weak
condition, might be disastrous to her. We are hedged in with
difficulties, all of us, my poor old fellow; but, please God, we shall
come through them all right. If any need I shall write, so that, if you
do not hear from me, take it for granted that I am simply waiting for
news. In haste

Yours ever,

"JOHN SEWARD."


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_7 September._--The first thing Van Helsing said to me when we met at
Liverpool Street was:--

"Have you said anything to our young friend the lover of her?"

"No," I said. "I waited till I had seen you, as I said in my telegram. I
wrote him a letter simply telling him that you were coming, as Miss
Westenra was not so well, and that I should let him know if need be."

"Right, my friend," he said, "quite right! Better he not know as yet;
perhaps he shall never know. I pray so; but if it be needed, then he
shall know all. And, my good friend John, let me caution you. You deal
with the madmen. All men are mad in some way or the other; and inasmuch
as you deal discreetly with your madmen, so deal with God's madmen,
too--the rest of the world. You tell not your madmen what you do nor why
you do it; you tell them not what you think. So you shall keep knowledge
in its place, where it may rest--where it may gather its kind around it
and breed. You and I shall keep as yet what we know here, and here." He
touched me on the heart and on the forehead, and then touched himself
the same way. "I have for myself thoughts at the present. Later I shall
unfold to you."

"Why not now?" I asked. "It may do some good; we may arrive at some
decision." He stopped and looked at me, and said:--

"My friend John, when the corn is grown, even before it has
ripened--while the milk of its mother-earth is in him, and the sunshine
has not yet begun to paint him with his gold, the husbandman he pull the
ear and rub him between his rough hands, and blow away the green chaff,
and say to you: 'Look! he's good corn; he will make good crop when the
time comes.'" I did not see the application, and told him so. For reply
he reached over and took my ear in his hand and pulled it playfully, as
he used long ago to do at lectures, and said: "The good husbandman tell
you so then because he knows, but not till then. But you do not find the
good husbandman dig up his planted corn to see if he grow; that is for
the children who play at husbandry, and not for those who take it as of
the work of their life. See you now, friend John? I have sown my corn,
and Nature has her work to do in making it sprout; if he sprout at all,
there's some promise; and I wait till the ear begins to swell." He broke
off, for he evidently saw that I understood. Then he went on, and very
gravely:--

"You were always a careful student, and your case-book was ever more
full than the rest. You were only student then; now you are master, and
I trust that good habit have not fail. Remember, my friend, that
knowledge is stronger than memory, and we should not trust the weaker.
Even if you have not kept the good practise, let me tell you that this
case of our dear miss is one that may be--mind, I say _may be_--of such
interest to us and others that all the rest may not make him kick the
beam, as your peoples say. Take then good note of it. Nothing is too
small. I counsel you, put down in record even your doubts and surmises.
Hereafter it may be of interest to you to see how true you guess. We
learn from failure, not from success!"

When I described Lucy's symptoms--the same as before, but infinitely
more marked--he looked very grave, but said nothing. He took with him a
bag in which were many instruments and drugs, "the ghastly paraphernalia
of our beneficial trade," as he once called, in one of his lectures, the
equipment of a professor of the healing craft. When we were shown in,
Mrs. Westenra met us. She was alarmed, but not nearly so much as I
expected to find her. Nature in one of her beneficent moods has ordained
that even death has some antidote to its own terrors. Here, in a case
where any shock may prove fatal, matters are so ordered that, from some
cause or other, the things not personal--even the terrible change in her
daughter to whom she is so attached--do not seem to reach her. It is
something like the way Dame Nature gathers round a foreign body an
envelope of some insensitive tissue which can protect from evil that
which it would otherwise harm by contact. If this be an ordered
selfishness, then we should pause before we condemn any one for the vice
of egoism, for there may be deeper root for its causes than we have
knowledge of.

I used my knowledge of this phase of spiritual pathology, and laid down
a rule that she should not be present with Lucy or think of her illness
more than was absolutely required. She assented readily, so readily that
I saw again the hand of Nature fighting for life. Van Helsing and I were
shown up to Lucy's room. If I was shocked when I saw her yesterday, I
was horrified when I saw her to-day. She was ghastly, chalkily pale; the
red seemed to have gone even from her lips and gums, and the bones of
her face stood out prominently; her breathing was painful to see or
hear. Van Helsing's face grew set as marble, and his eyebrows converged
till they almost touched over his nose. Lucy lay motionless, and did not
seem to have strength to speak, so for a while we were all silent. Then
Van Helsing beckoned to me, and we went gently out of the room. The
instant we had closed the door he stepped quickly along the passage to
the next door, which was open. Then he pulled me quickly in with him and
closed the door. "My God!" he said; "this is dreadful. There is no time
to be lost. She will die for sheer want of blood to keep the heart's
action as it should be. There must be transfusion of blood at once. Is
it you or me?"

"I am younger and stronger, Professor. It must be me."

"Then get ready at once. I will bring up my bag. I am prepared."

I went downstairs with him, and as we were going there was a knock at
the hall-door. When we reached the hall the maid had just opened the
door, and Arthur was stepping quickly in. He rushed up to me, saying in
an eager whisper:--

"Jack, I was so anxious. I read between the lines of your letter, and
have been in an agony. The dad was better, so I ran down here to see for
myself. Is not that gentleman Dr. Van Helsing? I am so thankful to you,
sir, for coming." When first the Professor's eye had lit upon him he had
been angry at his interruption at such a time; but now, as he took in
his stalwart proportions and recognised the strong young manhood which
seemed to emanate from him, his eyes gleamed. Without a pause he said to
him gravely as he held out his hand:--

"Sir, you have come in time. You are the lover of our dear miss. She is
bad, very, very bad. Nay, my child, do not go like that." For he
suddenly grew pale and sat down in a chair almost fainting. "You are to
help her. You can do more than any that live, and your courage is your
best help."

"What can I do?" asked Arthur hoarsely. "Tell me, and I shall do it. My
life is hers, and I would give the last drop of blood in my body for
her." The Professor has a strongly humorous side, and I could from old
knowledge detect a trace of its origin in his answer:--

"My young sir, I do not ask so much as that--not the last!"

"What shall I do?" There was fire in his eyes, and his open nostril
quivered with intent. Van Helsing slapped him on the shoulder. "Come!"
he said. "You are a man, and it is a man we want. You are better than
me, better than my friend John." Arthur looked bewildered, and the
Professor went on by explaining in a kindly way:--

"Young miss is bad, very bad. She wants blood, and blood she must have
or die. My friend John and I have consulted; and we are about to perform
what we call transfusion of blood--to transfer from full veins of one to
the empty veins which pine for him. John was to give his blood, as he is
the more young and strong than me"--here Arthur took my hand and wrung
it hard in silence--"but, now you are here, you are more good than us,
old or young, who toil much in the world of thought. Our nerves are not
so calm and our blood not so bright than yours!" Arthur turned to him
and said:--

"If you only knew how gladly I would die for her you would
understand----"

He stopped, with a sort of choke in his voice.

"Good boy!" said Van Helsing. "In the not-so-far-off you will be happy
that you have done all for her you love. Come now and be silent. You
shall kiss her once before it is done, but then you must go; and you
must leave at my sign. Say no word to Madame; you know how it is with
her! There must be no shock; any knowledge of this would be one. Come!"

We all went up to Lucy's room. Arthur by direction remained outside.
Lucy turned her head and looked at us, but said nothing. She was not
asleep, but she was simply too weak to make the effort. Her eyes spoke
to us; that was all. Van Helsing took some things from his bag and laid
them on a little table out of sight. Then he mixed a narcotic, and
coming over to the bed, said cheerily:--

"Now, little miss, here is your medicine. Drink it off, like a good
child. See, I lift you so that to swallow is easy. Yes." She had made
the effort with success.

It astonished me how long the drug took to act. This, in fact, marked
the extent of her weakness. The time seemed endless until sleep began to
flicker in her eyelids. At last, however, the narcotic began to manifest
its potency; and she fell into a deep sleep. When the Professor was
satisfied he called Arthur into the room, and bade him strip off his
coat. Then he added: "You may take that one little kiss whiles I bring
over the table. Friend John, help to me!" So neither of us looked whilst
he bent over her.

Van Helsing turning to me, said:

"He is so young and strong and of blood so pure that we need not
defibrinate it."

Then with swiftness, but with absolute method, Van Helsing performed the
operation. As the transfusion went on something like life seemed to come
back to poor Lucy's cheeks, and through Arthur's growing pallor the joy
of his face seemed absolutely to shine. After a bit I began to grow
anxious, for the loss of blood was telling on Arthur, strong man as he
was. It gave me an idea of what a terrible strain Lucy's system must
have undergone that what weakened Arthur only partially restored her.
But the Professor's face was set, and he stood watch in hand and with
his eyes fixed now on the patient and now on Arthur. I could hear my own
heart beat. Presently he said in a soft voice: "Do not stir an instant.
It is enough. You attend him; I will look to her." When all was over I
could see how much Arthur was weakened. I dressed the wound and took his
arm to bring him away, when Van Helsing spoke without turning round--the
man seems to have eyes in the back of his head:--

"The brave lover, I think, deserve another kiss, which he shall have
presently." And as he had now finished his operation, he adjusted the
pillow to the patient's head. As he did so the narrow black velvet band
which she seems always to wear round her throat, buckled with an old
diamond buckle which her lover had given her, was dragged a little up,
and showed a red mark on her throat. Arthur did not notice it, but I
could hear the deep hiss of indrawn breath which is one of Van Helsing's
ways of betraying emotion. He said nothing at the moment, but turned to
me, saying: "Now take down our brave young lover, give him of the port
wine, and let him lie down a while. He must then go home and rest, sleep
much and eat much, that he may be recruited of what he has so given to
his love. He must not stay here. Hold! a moment. I may take it, sir,
that you are anxious of result. Then bring it with you that in all ways
the operation is successful. You have saved her life this time, and you
can go home and rest easy in mind that all that can be is. I shall tell
her all when she is well; she shall love you none the less for what you
have done. Good-bye."

When Arthur had gone I went back to the room. Lucy was sleeping gently,
but her breathing was stronger; I could see the counterpane move as her
breast heaved. By the bedside sat Van Helsing, looking at her intently.
The velvet band again covered the red mark. I asked the Professor in a
whisper:--

"What do you make of that mark on her throat?"

"What do you make of it?"

"I have not examined it yet," I answered, and then and there proceeded
to loose the band. Just over the external jugular vein there were two
punctures, not large, but not wholesome-looking. There was no sign of
disease, but the edges were white and worn-looking, as if by some
trituration. It at once occurred to me that this wound, or whatever it
was, might be the means of that manifest loss of blood; but I abandoned
the idea as soon as formed, for such a thing could not be. The whole bed
would have been drenched to a scarlet with the blood which the girl must
have lost to leave such a pallor as she had before the transfusion.

"Well?" said Van Helsing.

"Well," said I, "I can make nothing of it." The Professor stood up. "I
must go back to Amsterdam to-night," he said. "There are books and
things there which I want. You must remain here all the night, and you
must not let your sight pass from her."

"Shall I have a nurse?" I asked.

"We are the best nurses, you and I. You keep watch all night; see that
she is well fed, and that nothing disturbs her. You must not sleep all
the night. Later on we can sleep, you and I. I shall be back as soon as
possible. And then we may begin."

"May begin?" I said. "What on earth do you mean?"

"We shall see!" he answered, as he hurried out. He came back a moment
later and put his head inside the door and said with warning finger held
up:--

"Remember, she is your charge. If you leave her, and harm befall, you
shall not sleep easy hereafter!"


_Dr. Seward's Diary--continued._

_8 September._--I sat up all night with Lucy. The opiate worked itself
off towards dusk, and she waked naturally; she looked a different being
from what she had been before the operation. Her spirits even were good,
and she was full of a happy vivacity, but I could see evidences of the
absolute prostration which she had undergone. When I told Mrs. Westenra
that Dr. Van Helsing had directed that I should sit up with her she
almost pooh-poohed the idea, pointing out her daughter's renewed
strength and excellent spirits. I was firm, however, and made
preparations for my long vigil. When her maid had prepared her for the
night I came in, having in the meantime had supper, and took a seat by
the bedside. She did not in any way make objection, but looked at me
gratefully whenever I caught her eye. After a long spell she seemed
sinking off to sleep, but with an effort seemed to pull herself together
and shook it off. This was repeated several times, with greater effort
and with shorter pauses as the time moved on. It was apparent that she
did not want to sleep, so I tackled the subject at once:--

"You do not want to go to sleep?"

"No; I am afraid."

"Afraid to go to sleep! Why so? It is the boon we all crave for."

"Ah, not if you were like me--if sleep was to you a presage of horror!"

"A presage of horror! What on earth do you mean?"

"I don't know; oh, I don't know. And that is what is so terrible. All
this weakness comes to me in sleep; until I dread the very thought."

"But, my dear girl, you may sleep to-night. I am here watching you, and
I can promise that nothing will happen."

"Ah, I can trust you!" I seized the opportunity, and said: "I promise
you that if I see any evidence of bad dreams I will wake you at once."

"You will? Oh, will you really? How good you are to me. Then I will
sleep!" And almost at the word she gave a deep sigh of relief, and sank
back, asleep.

All night long I watched by her. She never stirred, but slept on and on
in a deep, tranquil, life-giving, health-giving sleep. Her lips were
slightly parted, and her breast rose and fell with the regularity of a
pendulum. There was a smile on her face, and it was evident that no bad
dreams had come to disturb her peace of mind.

In the early morning her maid came, and I left her in her care and took
myself back home, for I was anxious about many things. I sent a short
wire to Van Helsing and to Arthur, telling them of the excellent result
of the operation. My own work, with its manifold arrears, took me all
day to clear off; it was dark when I was able to inquire about my
zoöphagous patient. The report was good; he had been quite quiet for the
past day and night. A telegram came from Van Helsing at Amsterdam whilst
I was at dinner, suggesting that I should be at Hillingham to-night, as
it might be well to be at hand, and stating that he was leaving by the
night mail and would join me early in the morning.

       *       *       *       *       *

_9 September_.--I was pretty tired and worn out when I got to
Hillingham. For two nights I had hardly had a wink of sleep, and my
brain was beginning to feel that numbness which marks cerebral
exhaustion. Lucy was up and in cheerful spirits. When she shook hands
with me she looked sharply in my face and said:--

"No sitting up to-night for you. You are worn out. I am quite well
again; indeed, I am; and if there is to be any sitting up, it is I who
will sit up with you." I would not argue the point, but went and had my
supper. Lucy came with me, and, enlivened by her charming presence, I
made an excellent meal, and had a couple of glasses of the more than
excellent port. Then Lucy took me upstairs, and showed me a room next
her own, where a cozy fire was burning. "Now," she said, "you must stay
here. I shall leave this door open and my door too. You can lie on the
sofa for I know that nothing would induce any of you doctors to go to
bed whilst there is a patient above the horizon. If I want anything I
shall call out, and you can come to me at once." I could not but
acquiesce, for I was "dog-tired," and could not have sat up had I tried.
So, on her renewing her promise to call me if she should want anything,
I lay on the sofa, and forgot all about everything.


_Lucy Westenra's Diary._

_9 September._--I feel so happy to-night. I have been so miserably weak,
that to be able to think and move about is like feeling sunshine after
a long spell of east wind out of a steel sky. Somehow Arthur feels very,
very close to me. I seem to feel his presence warm about me. I suppose
it is that sickness and weakness are selfish things and turn our inner
eyes and sympathy on ourselves, whilst health and strength give Love
rein, and in thought and feeling he can wander where he wills. I know
where my thoughts are. If Arthur only knew! My dear, my dear, your ears
must tingle as you sleep, as mine do waking. Oh, the blissful rest of
last night! How I slept, with that dear, good Dr. Seward watching me.
And to-night I shall not fear to sleep, since he is close at hand and
within call. Thank everybody for being so good to me! Thank God!
Good-night, Arthur.


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_10 September._--I was conscious of the Professor's hand on my head, and
started awake all in a second. That is one of the things that we learn
in an asylum, at any rate.

"And how is our patient?"

"Well, when I left her, or rather when she left me," I answered.

"Come, let us see," he said. And together we went into the room.

The blind was down, and I went over to raise it gently, whilst Van
Helsing stepped, with his soft, cat-like tread, over to the bed.

As I raised the blind, and the morning sunlight flooded the room, I
heard the Professor's low hiss of inspiration, and knowing its rarity, a
deadly fear shot through my heart. As I passed over he moved back, and
his exclamation of horror, "Gott in Himmel!" needed no enforcement from
his agonised face. He raised his hand and pointed to the bed, and his
iron face was drawn and ashen white. I felt my knees begin to tremble.

There on the bed, seemingly in a swoon, lay poor Lucy, more horribly
white and wan-looking than ever. Even the lips were white, and the gums
seemed to have shrunken back from the teeth, as we sometimes see in a
corpse after a prolonged illness. Van Helsing raised his foot to stamp
in anger, but the instinct of his life and all the long years of habit
stood to him, and he put it down again softly. "Quick!" he said. "Bring
the brandy." I flew to the dining-room, and returned with the decanter.
He wetted the poor white lips with it, and together we rubbed palm and
wrist and heart. He felt her heart, and after a few moments of agonising
suspense said:--

"It is not too late. It beats, though but feebly. All our work is
undone; we must begin again. There is no young Arthur here now; I have
to call on you yourself this time, friend John." As he spoke, he was
dipping into his bag and producing the instruments for transfusion; I
had taken off my coat and rolled up my shirt-sleeve. There was no
possibility of an opiate just at present, and no need of one; and so,
without a moment's delay, we began the operation. After a time--it did
not seem a short time either, for the draining away of one's blood, no
matter how willingly it be given, is a terrible feeling--Van Helsing
held up a warning finger. "Do not stir," he said, "but I fear that with
growing strength she may wake; and that would make danger, oh, so much
danger. But I shall precaution take. I shall give hypodermic injection
of morphia." He proceeded then, swiftly and deftly, to carry out his
intent. The effect on Lucy was not bad, for the faint seemed to merge
subtly into the narcotic sleep. It was with a feeling of personal pride
that I could see a faint tinge of colour steal back into the pallid
cheeks and lips. No man knows, till he experiences it, what it is to
feel his own life-blood drawn away into the veins of the woman he loves.

The Professor watched me critically. "That will do," he said. "Already?"
I remonstrated. "You took a great deal more from Art." To which he
smiled a sad sort of smile as he replied:--

"He is her lover, her _fiancé_. You have work, much work, to do for her
and for others; and the present will suffice."

When we stopped the operation, he attended to Lucy, whilst I applied
digital pressure to my own incision. I laid down, whilst I waited his
leisure to attend to me, for I felt faint and a little sick. By-and-by
he bound up my wound, and sent me downstairs to get a glass of wine for
myself. As I was leaving the room, he came after me, and half
whispered:--

"Mind, nothing must be said of this. If our young lover should turn up
unexpected, as before, no word to him. It would at once frighten him and
enjealous him, too. There must be none. So!"

When I came back he looked at me carefully, and then said:--

"You are not much the worse. Go into the room, and lie on your sofa, and
rest awhile; then have much breakfast, and come here to me."

I followed out his orders, for I knew how right and wise they were. I
had done my part, and now my next duty was to keep up my strength. I
felt very weak, and in the weakness lost something of the amazement at
what had occurred. I fell asleep on the sofa, however, wondering over
and over again how Lucy had made such a retrograde movement, and how
she could have been drained of so much blood with no sign anywhere to
show for it. I think I must have continued my wonder in my dreams, for,
sleeping and waking, my thoughts always came back to the little
punctures in her throat and the ragged, exhausted appearance of their
edges--tiny though they were.

Lucy slept well into the day, and when she woke she was fairly well and
strong, though not nearly so much so as the day before. When Van Helsing
had seen her, he went out for a walk, leaving me in charge, with strict
injunctions that I was not to leave her for a moment. I could hear his
voice in the hall, asking the way to the nearest telegraph office.

Lucy chatted with me freely, and seemed quite unconscious that anything
had happened. I tried to keep her amused and interested. When her mother
came up to see her, she did not seem to notice any change whatever, but
said to me gratefully:--

"We owe you so much, Dr. Seward, for all you have done, but you really
must now take care not to overwork yourself. You are looking pale
yourself. You want a wife to nurse and look after you a bit; that you
do!" As she spoke, Lucy turned crimson, though it was only momentarily,
for her poor wasted veins could not stand for long such an unwonted
drain to the head. The reaction came in excessive pallor as she turned
imploring eyes on me. I smiled and nodded, and laid my finger on my
lips; with a sigh, she sank back amid her pillows.

Van Helsing returned in a couple of hours, and presently said to me:
"Now you go home, and eat much and drink enough. Make yourself strong. I
stay here to-night, and I shall sit up with little miss myself. You and
I must watch the case, and we must have none other to know. I have grave
reasons. No, do not ask them; think what you will. Do not fear to think
even the most not-probable. Good-night."

In the hall two of the maids came to me, and asked if they or either of
them might not sit up with Miss Lucy. They implored me to let them; and
when I said it was Dr. Van Helsing's wish that either he or I should sit
up, they asked me quite piteously to intercede with the "foreign
gentleman." I was much touched by their kindness. Perhaps it is because
I am weak at present, and perhaps because it was on Lucy's account, that
their devotion was manifested; for over and over again have I seen
similar instances of woman's kindness. I got back here in time for a
late dinner; went my rounds--all well; and set this down whilst waiting
for sleep. It is coming.

       *       *       *       *       *

_11 September._--This afternoon I went over to Hillingham. Found Van
Helsing in excellent spirits, and Lucy much better. Shortly after I had
arrived, a big parcel from abroad came for the Professor. He opened it
with much impressment--assumed, of course--and showed a great bundle of
white flowers.

"These are for you, Miss Lucy," he said.

"For me? Oh, Dr. Van Helsing!"

"Yes, my dear, but not for you to play with. These are medicines." Here
Lucy made a wry face. "Nay, but they are not to take in a decoction or
in nauseous form, so you need not snub that so charming nose, or I shall
point out to my friend Arthur what woes he may have to endure in seeing
so much beauty that he so loves so much distort. Aha, my pretty miss,
that bring the so nice nose all straight again. This is medicinal, but
you do not know how. I put him in your window, I make pretty wreath, and
hang him round your neck, so that you sleep well. Oh yes! they, like the
lotus flower, make your trouble forgotten. It smell so like the waters
of Lethe, and of that fountain of youth that the Conquistadores sought
for in the Floridas, and find him all too late."

Whilst he was speaking, Lucy had been examining the flowers and smelling
them. Now she threw them down, saying, with half-laughter, and
half-disgust:--

"Oh, Professor, I believe you are only putting up a joke on me. Why,
these flowers are only common garlic."

To my surprise, Van Helsing rose up and said with all his sternness, his
iron jaw set and his bushy eyebrows meeting:--

"No trifling with me! I never jest! There is grim purpose in all I do;
and I warn you that you do not thwart me. Take care, for the sake of
others if not for your own." Then seeing poor Lucy scared, as she might
well be, he went on more gently: "Oh, little miss, my dear, do not fear
me. I only do for your good; but there is much virtue to you in those so
common flowers. See, I place them myself in your room. I make myself the
wreath that you are to wear. But hush! no telling to others that make so
inquisitive questions. We must obey, and silence is a part of obedience;
and obedience is to bring you strong and well into loving arms that wait
for you. Now sit still awhile. Come with me, friend John, and you shall
help me deck the room with my garlic, which is all the way from Haarlem,
where my friend Vanderpool raise herb in his glass-houses all the year.
I had to telegraph yesterday, or they would not have been here."

We went into the room, taking the flowers with us. The Professor's
actions were certainly odd and not to be found in any pharmacopoeia
that I ever heard of. First he fastened up the windows and latched them
securely; next, taking a handful of the flowers, he rubbed them all over
the sashes, as though to ensure that every whiff of air that might get
in would be laden with the garlic smell. Then with the wisp he rubbed
all over the jamb of the door, above, below, and at each side, and round
the fireplace in the same way. It all seemed grotesque to me, and
presently I said:--

"Well, Professor, I know you always have a reason for what you do, but
this certainly puzzles me. It is well we have no sceptic here, or he
would say that you were working some spell to keep out an evil spirit."

"Perhaps I am!" he answered quietly as he began to make the wreath which
Lucy was to wear round her neck.

We then waited whilst Lucy made her toilet for the night, and when she
was in bed he came and himself fixed the wreath of garlic round her
neck. The last words he said to her were:--

"Take care you do not disturb it; and even if the room feel close, do
not to-night open the window or the door."

"I promise," said Lucy, "and thank you both a thousand times for all
your kindness to me! Oh, what have I done to be blessed with such
friends?"

As we left the house in my fly, which was waiting, Van Helsing said:--

"To-night I can sleep in peace, and sleep I want--two nights of travel,
much reading in the day between, and much anxiety on the day to follow,
and a night to sit up, without to wink. To-morrow in the morning early
you call for me, and we come together to see our pretty miss, so much
more strong for my 'spell' which I have work. Ho! ho!"

He seemed so confident that I, remembering my own confidence two nights
before and with the baneful result, felt awe and vague terror. It must
have been my weakness that made me hesitate to tell it to my friend, but
I felt it all the more, like unshed tears.




CHAPTER XI

_Lucy Westenra's Diary._


_12 September._--How good they all are to me. I quite love that dear Dr.
Van Helsing. I wonder why he was so anxious about these flowers. He
positively frightened me, he was so fierce. And yet he must have been
right, for I feel comfort from them already. Somehow, I do not dread
being alone to-night, and I can go to sleep without fear. I shall not
mind any flapping outside the window. Oh, the terrible struggle that I
have had against sleep so often of late; the pain of the sleeplessness,
or the pain of the fear of sleep, with such unknown horrors as it has
for me! How blessed are some people, whose lives have no fears, no
dreads; to whom sleep is a blessing that comes nightly, and brings
nothing but sweet dreams. Well, here I am to-night, hoping for sleep,
and lying like Ophelia in the play, with "virgin crants and maiden
strewments." I never liked garlic before, but to-night it is delightful!
There is peace in its smell; I feel sleep coming already. Good-night,
everybody.


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_13 September._--Called at the Berkeley and found Van Helsing, as usual,
up to time. The carriage ordered from the hotel was waiting. The
Professor took his bag, which he always brings with him now.

Let all be put down exactly. Van Helsing and I arrived at Hillingham at
eight o'clock. It was a lovely morning; the bright sunshine and all the
fresh feeling of early autumn seemed like the completion of nature's
annual work. The leaves were turning to all kinds of beautiful colours,
but had not yet begun to drop from the trees. When we entered we met
Mrs. Westenra coming out of the morning room. She is always an early
riser. She greeted us warmly and said:--

"You will be glad to know that Lucy is better. The dear child is still
asleep. I looked into her room and saw her, but did not go in, lest I
should disturb her." The Professor smiled, and looked quite jubilant. He
rubbed his hands together, and said:--

"Aha! I thought I had diagnosed the case. My treatment is working," to
which she answered:--

"You must not take all the credit to yourself, doctor. Lucy's state this
morning is due in part to me."

"How you do mean, ma'am?" asked the Professor.

"Well, I was anxious about the dear child in the night, and went into
her room. She was sleeping soundly--so soundly that even my coming did
not wake her. But the room was awfully stuffy. There were a lot of those
horrible, strong-smelling flowers about everywhere, and she had actually
a bunch of them round her neck. I feared that the heavy odour would be
too much for the dear child in her weak state, so I took them all away
and opened a bit of the window to let in a little fresh air. You will be
pleased with her, I am sure."

She moved off into her boudoir, where she usually breakfasted early. As
she had spoken, I watched the Professor's face, and saw it turn ashen
grey. He had been able to retain his self-command whilst the poor lady
was present, for he knew her state and how mischievous a shock would be;
he actually smiled on her as he held open the door for her to pass into
her room. But the instant she had disappeared he pulled me, suddenly and
forcibly, into the dining-room and closed the door.

Then, for the first time in my life, I saw Van Helsing break down. He
raised his hands over his head in a sort of mute despair, and then beat
his palms together in a helpless way; finally he sat down on a chair,
and putting his hands before his face, began to sob, with loud, dry sobs
that seemed to come from the very racking of his heart. Then he raised
his arms again, as though appealing to the whole universe. "God! God!
God!" he said. "What have we done, what has this poor thing done, that
we are so sore beset? Is there fate amongst us still, sent down from the
pagan world of old, that such things must be, and in such way? This poor
mother, all unknowing, and all for the best as she think, does such
thing as lose her daughter body and soul; and we must not tell her, we
must not even warn her, or she die, and then both die. Oh, how we are
beset! How are all the powers of the devils against us!" Suddenly he
jumped to his feet. "Come," he said, "come, we must see and act. Devils
or no devils, or all the devils at once, it matters not; we fight him
all the same." He went to the hall-door for his bag; and together we
went up to Lucy's room.

Once again I drew up the blind, whilst Van Helsing went towards the bed.
This time he did not start as he looked on the poor face with the same
awful, waxen pallor as before. He wore a look of stern sadness and
infinite pity.

"As I expected," he murmured, with that hissing inspiration of his which
meant so much. Without a word he went and locked the door, and then
began to set out on the little table the instruments for yet another
operation of transfusion of blood. I had long ago recognised the
necessity, and begun to take off my coat, but he stopped me with a
warning hand. "No!" he said. "To-day you must operate. I shall provide.
You are weakened already." As he spoke he took off his coat and rolled
up his shirt-sleeve.

Again the operation; again the narcotic; again some return of colour to
the ashy cheeks, and the regular breathing of healthy sleep. This time I
watched whilst Van Helsing recruited himself and rested.

Presently he took an opportunity of telling Mrs. Westenra that she must
not remove anything from Lucy's room without consulting him; that the
flowers were of medicinal value, and that the breathing of their odour
was a part of the system of cure. Then he took over the care of the case
himself, saying that he would watch this night and the next and would
send me word when to come.

After another hour Lucy waked from her sleep, fresh and bright and
seemingly not much the worse for her terrible ordeal.

What does it all mean? I am beginning to wonder if my long habit of life
amongst the insane is beginning to tell upon my own brain.


_Lucy Westenra's Diary._

_17 September._--Four days and nights of peace. I am getting so strong
again that I hardly know myself. It is as if I had passed through some
long nightmare, and had just awakened to see the beautiful sunshine and
feel the fresh air of the morning around me. I have a dim
half-remembrance of long, anxious times of waiting and fearing; darkness
in which there was not even the pain of hope to make present distress
more poignant: and then long spells of oblivion, and the rising back to
life as a diver coming up through a great press of water. Since,
however, Dr. Van Helsing has been with me, all this bad dreaming seems
to have passed away; the noises that used to frighten me out of my
wits--the flapping against the windows, the distant voices which seemed
so close to me, the harsh sounds that came from I know not where and
commanded me to do I know not what--have all ceased. I go to bed now
without any fear of sleep. I do not even try to keep awake. I have grown
quite fond of the garlic, and a boxful arrives for me every day from
Haarlem. To-night Dr. Van Helsing is going away, as he has to be for a
day in Amsterdam. But I need not be watched; I am well enough to be left
alone. Thank God for mother's sake, and dear Arthur's, and for all our
friends who have been so kind! I shall not even feel the change, for
last night Dr. Van Helsing slept in his chair a lot of the time. I found
him asleep twice when I awoke; but I did not fear to go to sleep again,
although the boughs or bats or something napped almost angrily against
the window-panes.


_"The Pall Mall Gazette," 18 September._

                           THE ESCAPED WOLF.

         PERILOUS ADVENTURE OF OUR INTERVIEWER.

         _Interview with the Keeper in the Zoölogical Gardens._

After many inquiries and almost as many refusals, and perpetually using
the words "Pall Mall Gazette" as a sort of talisman, I managed to find
the keeper of the section of the Zoölogical Gardens in which the wolf
department is included. Thomas Bilder lives in one of the cottages in
the enclosure behind the elephant-house, and was just sitting down to
his tea when I found him. Thomas and his wife are hospitable folk,
elderly, and without children, and if the specimen I enjoyed of their
hospitality be of the average kind, their lives must be pretty
comfortable. The keeper would not enter on what he called "business"
until the supper was over, and we were all satisfied. Then when the
table was cleared, and he had lit his pipe, he said:--

"Now, sir, you can go on and arsk me what you want. You'll excoose me
refoosin' to talk of perfeshunal subjects afore meals. I gives the
wolves and the jackals and the hyenas in all our section their tea afore
I begins to arsk them questions."

"How do you mean, ask them questions?" I queried, wishful to get him
into a talkative humour.

"'Ittin' of them over the 'ead with a pole is one way; scratchin' of
their hears is another, when gents as is flush wants a bit of a show-orf
to their gals. I don't so much mind the fust--the 'ittin' with a pole
afore I chucks in their dinner; but I waits till they've 'ad their
sherry and kawffee, so to speak, afore I tries on with the
ear-scratchin'. Mind you," he added philosophically, "there's a deal of
the same nature in us as in them theer animiles. Here's you a-comin' and
arskin' of me questions about my business, and I that grumpy-like that
only for your bloomin' 'arf-quid I'd 'a' seen you blowed fust 'fore I'd
answer. Not even when you arsked me sarcastic-like if I'd like you to
arsk the Superintendent if you might arsk me questions. Without offence
did I tell yer to go to 'ell?"

"You did."

"An' when you said you'd report me for usin' of obscene language that
was 'ittin' me over the 'ead; but the 'arf-quid made that all right. I
weren't a-goin' to fight, so I waited for the food, and did with my 'owl
as the wolves, and lions, and tigers does. But, Lor' love yer 'art, now
that the old 'ooman has stuck a chunk of her tea-cake in me, an' rinsed
me out with her bloomin' old teapot, and I've lit hup, you may scratch
my ears for all you're worth, and won't git even a growl out of me.
Drive along with your questions. I know what yer a-comin' at, that 'ere
escaped wolf."

"Exactly. I want you to give me your view of it. Just tell me how it
happened; and when I know the facts I'll get you to say what you
consider was the cause of it, and how you think the whole affair will
end."

"All right, guv'nor. This 'ere is about the 'ole story. That 'ere wolf
what we called Bersicker was one of three grey ones that came from
Norway to Jamrach's, which we bought off him four years ago. He was a
nice well-behaved wolf, that never gave no trouble to talk of. I'm more
surprised at 'im for wantin' to get out nor any other animile in the
place. But, there, you can't trust wolves no more nor women."

"Don't you mind him, sir!" broke in Mrs. Tom, with a cheery laugh. "'E's
got mindin' the animiles so long that blest if he ain't like a old wolf
'isself! But there ain't no 'arm in 'im."

"Well, sir, it was about two hours after feedin' yesterday when I first
hear my disturbance. I was makin' up a litter in the monkey-house for a
young puma which is ill; but when I heard the yelpin' and 'owlin' I kem
away straight. There was Bersicker a-tearin' like a mad thing at the
bars as if he wanted to get out. There wasn't much people about that
day, and close at hand was only one man, a tall, thin chap, with a 'ook
nose and a pointed beard, with a few white hairs runnin' through it. He
had a 'ard, cold look and red eyes, and I took a sort of mislike to him,
for it seemed as if it was 'im as they was hirritated at. He 'ad white
kid gloves on 'is 'ands, and he pointed out the animiles to me and says:
'Keeper, these wolves seem upset at something.'

"'Maybe it's you,' says I, for I did not like the airs as he give
'isself. He didn't git angry, as I 'oped he would, but he smiled a kind
of insolent smile, with a mouth full of white, sharp teeth. 'Oh no, they
wouldn't like me,' 'e says.

"'Ow yes, they would,' says I, a-imitatin' of him. 'They always likes a
bone or two to clean their teeth on about tea-time, which you 'as a
bagful.'

"Well, it was a odd thing, but when the animiles see us a-talkin' they
lay down, and when I went over to Bersicker he let me stroke his ears
same as ever. That there man kem over, and blessed but if he didn't put
in his hand and stroke the old wolf's ears too!

"'Tyke care,' says I. 'Bersicker is quick.'

"'Never mind,' he says. 'I'm used to 'em!'

"'Are you in the business yourself?' I says, tyking off my 'at, for a
man what trades in wolves, anceterer, is a good friend to keepers.

"'No' says he, 'not exactly in the business, but I 'ave made pets of
several.' And with that he lifts his 'at as perlite as a lord, and walks
away. Old Bersicker kep' a-lookin' arter 'im till 'e was out of sight,
and then went and lay down in a corner and wouldn't come hout the 'ole
hevening. Well, larst night, so soon as the moon was hup, the wolves
here all began a-'owling. There warn't nothing for them to 'owl at.
There warn't no one near, except some one that was evidently a-callin' a
dog somewheres out back of the gardings in the Park road. Once or twice
I went out to see that all was right, and it was, and then the 'owling
stopped. Just before twelve o'clock I just took a look round afore
turnin' in, an', bust me, but when I kem opposite to old Bersicker's
cage I see the rails broken and twisted about and the cage empty. And
that's all I know for certing."

"Did any one else see anything?"

"One of our gard'ners was a-comin' 'ome about that time from a 'armony,
when he sees a big grey dog comin' out through the garding 'edges. At
least, so he says, but I don't give much for it myself, for if he did 'e
never said a word about it to his missis when 'e got 'ome, and it was
only after the escape of the wolf was made known, and we had been up all
night-a-huntin' of the Park for Bersicker, that he remembered seein'
anything. My own belief was that the 'armony 'ad got into his 'ead."

"Now, Mr. Bilder, can you account in any way for the escape of the
wolf?"

"Well, sir," he said, with a suspicious sort of modesty, "I think I can;
but I don't know as 'ow you'd be satisfied with the theory."

"Certainly I shall. If a man like you, who knows the animals from
experience, can't hazard a good guess at any rate, who is even to try?"

"Well then, sir, I accounts for it this way; it seems to me that 'ere
wolf escaped--simply because he wanted to get out."

From the hearty way that both Thomas and his wife laughed at the joke I
could see that it had done service before, and that the whole
explanation was simply an elaborate sell. I couldn't cope in badinage
with the worthy Thomas, but I thought I knew a surer way to his heart,
so I said:--

"Now, Mr. Bilder, we'll consider that first half-sovereign worked off,
and this brother of his is waiting to be claimed when you've told me
what you think will happen."

"Right y'are, sir," he said briskly. "Ye'll excoose me, I know, for
a-chaffin' of ye, but the old woman here winked at me, which was as much
as telling me to go on."

"Well, I never!" said the old lady.

"My opinion is this: that 'ere wolf is a-'idin' of, somewheres. The
gard'ner wot didn't remember said he was a-gallopin' northward faster
than a horse could go; but I don't believe him, for, yer see, sir,
wolves don't gallop no more nor dogs does, they not bein' built that
way. Wolves is fine things in a storybook, and I dessay when they gets
in packs and does be chivyin' somethin' that's more afeared than they is
they can make a devil of a noise and chop it up, whatever it is. But,
Lor' bless you, in real life a wolf is only a low creature, not half so
clever or bold as a good dog; and not half a quarter so much fight in
'im. This one ain't been used to fightin' or even to providin' for
hisself, and more like he's somewhere round the Park a-'idin' an'
a-shiverin' of, and, if he thinks at all, wonderin' where he is to get
his breakfast from; or maybe he's got down some area and is in a
coal-cellar. My eye, won't some cook get a rum start when she sees his
green eyes a-shining at her out of the dark! If he can't get food he's
bound to look for it, and mayhap he may chance to light on a butcher's
shop in time. If he doesn't, and some nursemaid goes a-walkin' orf with
a soldier, leavin' of the hinfant in the perambulator--well, then I
shouldn't be surprised if the census is one babby the less. That's
all."

I was handing him the half-sovereign, when something came bobbing up
against the window, and Mr. Bilder's face doubled its natural length
with surprise.

"God bless me!" he said. "If there ain't old Bersicker come back by
'isself!"

He went to the door and opened it; a most unnecessary proceeding it
seemed to me. I have always thought that a wild animal never looks so
well as when some obstacle of pronounced durability is between us; a
personal experience has intensified rather than diminished that idea.

After all, however, there is nothing like custom, for neither Bilder nor
his wife thought any more of the wolf than I should of a dog. The animal
itself was as peaceful and well-behaved as that father of all
picture-wolves--Red Riding Hood's quondam friend, whilst moving her
confidence in masquerade.

The whole scene was an unutterable mixture of comedy and pathos. The
wicked wolf that for half a day had paralysed London and set all the
children in the town shivering in their shoes, was there in a sort of
penitent mood, and was received and petted like a sort of vulpine
prodigal son. Old Bilder examined him all over with most tender
solicitude, and when he had finished with his penitent said:--

"There, I knew the poor old chap would get into some kind of trouble;
didn't I say it all along? Here's his head all cut and full of broken
glass. 'E's been a-gettin' over some bloomin' wall or other. It's a
shyme that people are allowed to top their walls with broken bottles.
This 'ere's what comes of it. Come along, Bersicker."

He took the wolf and locked him up in a cage, with a piece of meat that
satisfied, in quantity at any rate, the elementary conditions of the
fatted calf, and went off to report.

I came off, too, to report the only exclusive information that is given
to-day regarding the strange escapade at the Zoo.


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_17 September._--I was engaged after dinner in my study posting up my
books, which, through press of other work and the many visits to Lucy,
had fallen sadly into arrear. Suddenly the door was burst open, and in
rushed my patient, with his face distorted with passion. I was
thunderstruck, for such a thing as a patient getting of his own accord
into the Superintendent's study is almost unknown. Without an instant's
pause he made straight at me. He had a dinner-knife in his hand, and,
as I saw he was dangerous, I tried to keep the table between us. He was
too quick and too strong for me, however; for before I could get my
balance he had struck at me and cut my left wrist rather severely.
Before he could strike again, however, I got in my right and he was
sprawling on his back on the floor. My wrist bled freely, and quite a
little pool trickled on to the carpet. I saw that my friend was not
intent on further effort, and occupied myself binding up my wrist,
keeping a wary eye on the prostrate figure all the time. When the
attendants rushed in, and we turned our attention to him, his employment
positively sickened me. He was lying on his belly on the floor licking
up, like a dog, the blood which had fallen from my wounded wrist. He was
easily secured, and, to my surprise, went with the attendants quite
placidly, simply repeating over and over again: "The blood is the life!
The blood is the life!"

I cannot afford to lose blood just at present; I have lost too much of
late for my physical good, and then the prolonged strain of Lucy's
illness and its horrible phases is telling on me. I am over-excited and
weary, and I need rest, rest, rest. Happily Van Helsing has not summoned
me, so I need not forego my sleep; to-night I could not well do without
it.


_Telegram, Van Helsing, Antwerp, to Seward, Carfax._

(Sent to Carfax, Sussex, as no county given; delivered late by
twenty-two hours.)

"_17 September._--Do not fail to be at Hillingham to-night. If not
watching all the time frequently, visit and see that flowers are as
placed; very important; do not fail. Shall be with you as soon as
possible after arrival."


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_18 September._--Just off for train to London. The arrival of Van
Helsing's telegram filled me with dismay. A whole night lost, and I know
by bitter experience what may happen in a night. Of course it is
possible that all may be well, but what _may_ have happened? Surely
there is some horrible doom hanging over us that every possible accident
should thwart us in all we try to do. I shall take this cylinder with
me, and then I can complete my entry on Lucy's phonograph.


_Memorandum left by Lucy Westenra._

_17 September. Night._--I write this and leave it to be seen, so that no
one may by any chance get into trouble through me. This is an exact
record of what took place to-night. I feel I am dying of weakness, and
have barely strength to write, but it must be done if I die in the
doing.

I went to bed as usual, taking care that the flowers were placed as Dr.
Van Helsing directed, and soon fell asleep.

I was waked by the flapping at the window, which had begun after that
sleep-walking on the cliff at Whitby when Mina saved me, and which now I
know so well. I was not afraid, but I did wish that Dr. Seward was in
the next room--as Dr. Van Helsing said he would be--so that I might have
called him. I tried to go to sleep, but could not. Then there came to me
the old fear of sleep, and I determined to keep awake. Perversely sleep
would try to come then when I did not want it; so, as I feared to be
alone, I opened my door and called out: "Is there anybody there?" There
was no answer. I was afraid to wake mother, and so closed my door again.
Then outside in the shrubbery I heard a sort of howl like a dog's, but
more fierce and deeper. I went to the window and looked out, but could
see nothing, except a big bat, which had evidently been buffeting its
wings against the window. So I went back to bed again, but determined
not to go to sleep. Presently the door opened, and mother looked in;
seeing by my moving that I was not asleep, came in, and sat by me. She
said to me even more sweetly and softly than her wont:--

"I was uneasy about you, darling, and came in to see that you were all
right."

I feared she might catch cold sitting there, and asked her to come in
and sleep with me, so she came into bed, and lay down beside me; she did
not take off her dressing gown, for she said she would only stay a while
and then go back to her own bed. As she lay there in my arms, and I in
hers, the flapping and buffeting came to the window again. She was
startled and a little frightened, and cried out: "What is that?" I tried
to pacify her, and at last succeeded, and she lay quiet; but I could
hear her poor dear heart still beating terribly. After a while there was
the low howl again out in the shrubbery, and shortly after there was a
crash at the window, and a lot of broken glass was hurled on the floor.
The window blind blew back with the wind that rushed in, and in the
aperture of the broken panes there was the head of a great, gaunt grey
wolf. Mother cried out in a fright, and struggled up into a sitting
posture, and clutched wildly at anything that would help her. Amongst
other things, she clutched the wreath of flowers that Dr. Van Helsing
insisted on my wearing round my neck, and tore it away from me. For a
second or two she sat up, pointing at the wolf, and there was a strange
and horrible gurgling in her throat; then she fell over--as if struck
with lightning, and her head hit my forehead and made me dizzy for a
moment or two. The room and all round seemed to spin round. I kept my
eyes fixed on the window, but the wolf drew his head back, and a whole
myriad of little specks seemed to come blowing in through the broken
window, and wheeling and circling round like the pillar of dust that
travellers describe when there is a simoon in the desert. I tried to
stir, but there was some spell upon me, and dear mother's poor body,
which seemed to grow cold already--for her dear heart had ceased to
beat--weighed me down; and I remembered no more for a while.

The time did not seem long, but very, very awful, till I recovered
consciousness again. Somewhere near, a passing bell was tolling; the
dogs all round the neighbourhood were howling; and in our shrubbery,
seemingly just outside, a nightingale was singing. I was dazed and
stupid with pain and terror and weakness, but the sound of the
nightingale seemed like the voice of my dead mother come back to comfort
me. The sounds seemed to have awakened the maids, too, for I could hear
their bare feet pattering outside my door. I called to them, and they
came in, and when they saw what had happened, and what it was that lay
over me on the bed, they screamed out. The wind rushed in through the
broken window, and the door slammed to. They lifted off the body of my
dear mother, and laid her, covered up with a sheet, on the bed after I
had got up. They were all so frightened and nervous that I directed them
to go to the dining-room and have each a glass of wine. The door flew
open for an instant and closed again. The maids shrieked, and then went
in a body to the dining-room; and I laid what flowers I had on my dear
mother's breast. When they were there I remembered what Dr. Van Helsing
had told me, but I didn't like to remove them, and, besides, I would
have some of the servants to sit up with me now. I was surprised that
the maids did not come back. I called them, but got no answer, so I went
to the dining-room to look for them.

My heart sank when I saw what had happened. They all four lay helpless
on the floor, breathing heavily. The decanter of sherry was on the table
half full, but there was a queer, acrid smell about. I was suspicious,
and examined the decanter. It smelt of laudanum, and looking on the
sideboard, I found that the bottle which mother's doctor uses for
her--oh! did use--was empty. What am I to do? what am I to do? I am back
in the room with mother. I cannot leave her, and I am alone, save for
the sleeping servants, whom some one has drugged. Alone with the dead! I
dare not go out, for I can hear the low howl of the wolf through the
broken window.

The air seems full of specks, floating and circling in the draught from
the window, and the lights burn blue and dim. What am I to do? God
shield me from harm this night! I shall hide this paper in my breast,
where they shall find it when they come to lay me out. My dear mother
gone! It is time that I go too. Good-bye, dear Arthur, if I should not
survive this night. God keep you, dear, and God help me!




CHAPTER XII

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


_18 September._--I drove at once to Hillingham and arrived early.
Keeping my cab at the gate, I went up the avenue alone. I knocked gently
and rang as quietly as possible, for I feared to disturb Lucy or her
mother, and hoped to only bring a servant to the door. After a while,
finding no response, I knocked and rang again; still no answer. I cursed
the laziness of the servants that they should lie abed at such an
hour--for it was now ten o'clock--and so rang and knocked again, but
more impatiently, but still without response. Hitherto I had blamed only
the servants, but now a terrible fear began to assail me. Was this
desolation but another link in the chain of doom which seemed drawing
tight around us? Was it indeed a house of death to which I had come, too
late? I knew that minutes, even seconds of delay, might mean hours of
danger to Lucy, if she had had again one of those frightful relapses;
and I went round the house to try if I could find by chance an entry
anywhere.

I could find no means of ingress. Every window and door was fastened and
locked, and I returned baffled to the porch. As I did so, I heard the
rapid pit-pat of a swiftly driven horse's feet. They stopped at the
gate, and a few seconds later I met Van Helsing running up the avenue.
When he saw me, he gasped out:--

"Then it was you, and just arrived. How is she? Are we too late? Did you
not get my telegram?"

I answered as quickly and coherently as I could that I had only got his
telegram early in the morning, and had not lost a minute in coming here,
and that I could not make any one in the house hear me. He paused and
raised his hat as he said solemnly:--

"Then I fear we are too late. God's will be done!" With his usual
recuperative energy, he went on: "Come. If there be no way open to get
in, we must make one. Time is all in all to us now."

We went round to the back of the house, where there was a kitchen
window. The Professor took a small surgical saw from his case, and
handing it to me, pointed to the iron bars which guarded the window. I
attacked them at once and had very soon cut through three of them. Then
with a long, thin knife we pushed back the fastening of the sashes and
opened the window. I helped the Professor in, and followed him. There
was no one in the kitchen or in the servants' rooms, which were close at
hand. We tried all the rooms as we went along, and in the dining-room,
dimly lit by rays of light through the shutters, found four
servant-women lying on the floor. There was no need to think them dead,
for their stertorous breathing and the acrid smell of laudanum in the
room left no doubt as to their condition. Van Helsing and I looked at
each other, and as we moved away he said: "We can attend to them later."
Then we ascended to Lucy's room. For an instant or two we paused at the
door to listen, but there was no sound that we could hear. With white
faces and trembling hands, we opened the door gently, and entered the
room.

How shall I describe what we saw? On the bed lay two women, Lucy and her
mother. The latter lay farthest in, and she was covered with a white
sheet, the edge of which had been blown back by the draught through the
broken window, showing the drawn, white face, with a look of terror
fixed upon it. By her side lay Lucy, with face white and still more
drawn. The flowers which had been round her neck we found upon her
mother's bosom, and her throat was bare, showing the two little wounds
which we had noticed before, but looking horribly white and mangled.
Without a word the Professor bent over the bed, his head almost touching
poor Lucy's breast; then he gave a quick turn of his head, as of one who
listens, and leaping to his feet, he cried out to me:--

"It is not yet too late! Quick! quick! Bring the brandy!"

I flew downstairs and returned with it, taking care to smell and taste
it, lest it, too, were drugged like the decanter of sherry which I found
on the table. The maids were still breathing, but more restlessly, and I
fancied that the narcotic was wearing off. I did not stay to make sure,
but returned to Van Helsing. He rubbed the brandy, as on another
occasion, on her lips and gums and on her wrists and the palms of her
hands. He said to me:--

"I can do this, all that can be at the present. You go wake those maids.
Flick them in the face with a wet towel, and flick them hard. Make them
get heat and fire and a warm bath. This poor soul is nearly as cold as
that beside her. She will need be heated before we can do anything
more."

I went at once, and found little difficulty in waking three of the
women. The fourth was only a young girl, and the drug had evidently
affected her more strongly, so I lifted her on the sofa and let her
sleep. The others were dazed at first, but as remembrance came back to
them they cried and sobbed in a hysterical manner. I was stern with
them, however, and would not let them talk. I told them that one life
was bad enough to lose, and that if they delayed they would sacrifice
Miss Lucy. So, sobbing and crying, they went about their way, half clad
as they were, and prepared fire and water. Fortunately, the kitchen and
boiler fires were still alive, and there was no lack of hot water. We
got a bath and carried Lucy out as she was and placed her in it. Whilst
we were busy chafing her limbs there was a knock at the hall door. One
of the maids ran off, hurried on some more clothes, and opened it. Then
she returned and whispered to us that there was a gentleman who had come
with a message from Mr. Holmwood. I bade her simply tell him that he
must wait, for we could see no one now. She went away with the message,
and, engrossed with our work, I clean forgot all about him.

I never saw in all my experience the Professor work in such deadly
earnest. I knew--as he knew--that it was a stand-up fight with death,
and in a pause told him so. He answered me in a way that I did not
understand, but with the sternest look that his face could wear:--

"If that were all, I would stop here where we are now, and let her fade
away into peace, for I see no light in life over her horizon." He went
on with his work with, if possible, renewed and more frenzied vigour.

Presently we both began to be conscious that the heat was beginning to
be of some effect. Lucy's heart beat a trifle more audibly to the
stethoscope, and her lungs had a perceptible movement. Van Helsing's
face almost beamed, and as we lifted her from the bath and rolled her in
a hot sheet to dry her he said to me:--

"The first gain is ours! Check to the King!"

We took Lucy into another room, which had by now been prepared, and laid
her in bed and forced a few drops of brandy down her throat. I noticed
that Van Helsing tied a soft silk handkerchief round her throat. She was
still unconscious, and was quite as bad as, if not worse than, we had
ever seen her.

Van Helsing called in one of the women, and told her to stay with her
and not to take her eyes off her till we returned, and then beckoned me
out of the room.

"We must consult as to what is to be done," he said as we descended the
stairs. In the hall he opened the dining-room door, and we passed in, he
closing the door carefully behind him. The shutters had been opened, but
the blinds were already down, with that obedience to the etiquette of
death which the British woman of the lower classes always rigidly
observes. The room was, therefore, dimly dark. It was, however, light
enough for our purposes. Van Helsing's sternness was somewhat relieved
by a look of perplexity. He was evidently torturing his mind about
something, so I waited for an instant, and he spoke:--

"What are we to do now? Where are we to turn for help? We must have
another transfusion of blood, and that soon, or that poor girl's life
won't be worth an hour's purchase. You are exhausted already; I am
exhausted too. I fear to trust those women, even if they would have
courage to submit. What are we to do for some one who will open his
veins for her?"

"What's the matter with me, anyhow?"

The voice came from the sofa across the room, and its tones brought
relief and joy to my heart, for they were those of Quincey Morris. Van
Helsing started angrily at the first sound, but his face softened and a
glad look came into his eyes as I cried out: "Quincey Morris!" and
rushed towards him with outstretched hands.

"What brought you here?" I cried as our hands met.

"I guess Art is the cause."

He handed me a telegram:--

"Have not heard from Seward for three days, and am terribly anxious.
Cannot leave. Father still in same condition. Send me word how Lucy is.
Do not delay.--HOLMWOOD."

"I think I came just in the nick of time. You know you have only to tell
me what to do."

Van Helsing strode forward, and took his hand, looking him straight in
the eyes as he said:--

"A brave man's blood is the best thing on this earth when a woman is in
trouble. You're a man and no mistake. Well, the devil may work against
us for all he's worth, but God sends us men when we want them."

Once again we went through that ghastly operation. I have not the heart
to go through with the details. Lucy had got a terrible shock and it
told on her more than before, for though plenty of blood went into her
veins, her body did not respond to the treatment as well as on the other
occasions. Her struggle back into life was something frightful to see
and hear. However, the action of both heart and lungs improved, and Van
Helsing made a subcutaneous injection of morphia, as before, and with
good effect. Her faint became a profound slumber. The Professor watched
whilst I went downstairs with Quincey Morris, and sent one of the maids
to pay off one of the cabmen who were waiting. I left Quincey lying down
after having a glass of wine, and told the cook to get ready a good
breakfast. Then a thought struck me, and I went back to the room where
Lucy now was. When I came softly in, I found Van Helsing with a sheet or
two of note-paper in his hand. He had evidently read it, and was
thinking it over as he sat with his hand to his brow. There was a look
of grim satisfaction in his face, as of one who has had a doubt solved.
He handed me the paper saying only: "It dropped from Lucy's breast when
we carried her to the bath."

When I had read it, I stood looking at the Professor, and after a pause
asked him: "In God's name, what does it all mean? Was she, or is she,
mad; or what sort of horrible danger is it?" I was so bewildered that I
did not know what to say more. Van Helsing put out his hand and took the
paper, saying:--

"Do not trouble about it now. Forget it for the present. You shall know
and understand it all in good time; but it will be later. And now what
is it that you came to me to say?" This brought me back to fact, and I
was all myself again.

"I came to speak about the certificate of death. If we do not act
properly and wisely, there may be an inquest, and that paper would have
to be produced. I am in hopes that we need have no inquest, for if we
had it would surely kill poor Lucy, if nothing else did. I know, and you
know, and the other doctor who attended her knows, that Mrs. Westenra
had disease of the heart, and we can certify that she died of it. Let us
fill up the certificate at once, and I shall take it myself to the
registrar and go on to the undertaker."

"Good, oh my friend John! Well thought of! Truly Miss Lucy, if she be
sad in the foes that beset her, is at least happy in the friends that
love her. One, two, three, all open their veins for her, besides one old
man. Ah yes, I know, friend John; I am not blind! I love you all the
more for it! Now go."

In the hall I met Quincey Morris, with a telegram for Arthur telling him
that Mrs. Westenra was dead; that Lucy also had been ill, but was now
going on better; and that Van Helsing and I were with her. I told him
where I was going, and he hurried me out, but as I was going said:--

"When you come back, Jack, may I have two words with you all to
ourselves?" I nodded in reply and went out. I found no difficulty about
the registration, and arranged with the local undertaker to come up in
the evening to measure for the coffin and to make arrangements.

When I got back Quincey was waiting for me. I told him I would see him
as soon as I knew about Lucy, and went up to her room. She was still
sleeping, and the Professor seemingly had not moved from his seat at her
side. From his putting his finger to his lips, I gathered that he
expected her to wake before long and was afraid of forestalling nature.
So I went down to Quincey and took him into the breakfast-room, where
the blinds were not drawn down, and which was a little more cheerful, or
rather less cheerless, than the other rooms. When we were alone, he said
to me:--

"Jack Seward, I don't want to shove myself in anywhere where I've no
right to be; but this is no ordinary case. You know I loved that girl
and wanted to marry her; but, although that's all past and gone, I can't
help feeling anxious about her all the same. What is it that's wrong
with her? The Dutchman--and a fine old fellow he is; I can see
that--said, that time you two came into the room, that you must have
_another_ transfusion of blood, and that both you and he were exhausted.
Now I know well that you medical men speak _in camera_, and that a man
must not expect to know what they consult about in private. But this is
no common matter, and, whatever it is, I have done my part. Is not that
so?"

"That's so," I said, and he went on:--

"I take it that both you and Van Helsing had done already what I did
to-day. Is not that so?"

"That's so."

"And I guess Art was in it too. When I saw him four days ago down at his
own place he looked queer. I have not seen anything pulled down so quick
since I was on the Pampas and had a mare that I was fond of go to grass
all in a night. One of those big bats that they call vampires had got at
her in the night, and what with his gorge and the vein left open, there
wasn't enough blood in her to let her stand up, and I had to put a
bullet through her as she lay. Jack, if you may tell me without
betraying confidence, Arthur was the first, is not that so?" As he spoke
the poor fellow looked terribly anxious. He was in a torture of suspense
regarding the woman he loved, and his utter ignorance of the terrible
mystery which seemed to surround her intensified his pain. His very
heart was bleeding, and it took all the manhood of him--and there was a
royal lot of it, too--to keep him from breaking down. I paused before
answering, for I felt that I must not betray anything which the
Professor wished kept secret; but already he knew so much, and guessed
so much, that there could be no reason for not answering, so I answered
in the same phrase: "That's so."

"And how long has this been going on?"

"About ten days."

"Ten days! Then I guess, Jack Seward, that that poor pretty creature
that we all love has had put into her veins within that time the blood
of four strong men. Man alive, her whole body wouldn't hold it." Then,
coming close to me, he spoke in a fierce half-whisper: "What took it
out?"

I shook my head. "That," I said, "is the crux. Van Helsing is simply
frantic about it, and I am at my wits' end. I can't even hazard a guess.
There has been a series of little circumstances which have thrown out
all our calculations as to Lucy being properly watched. But these shall
not occur again. Here we stay until all be well--or ill." Quincey held
out his hand. "Count me in," he said. "You and the Dutchman will tell me
what to do, and I'll do it."

When she woke late in the afternoon, Lucy's first movement was to feel
in her breast, and, to my surprise, produced the paper which Van Helsing
had given me to read. The careful Professor had replaced it where it had
come from, lest on waking she should be alarmed. Her eye then lit on Van
Helsing and on me too, and gladdened. Then she looked around the room,
and seeing where she was, shuddered; she gave a loud cry, and put her
poor thin hands before her pale face. We both understood what that
meant--that she had realised to the full her mother's death; so we tried
what we could to comfort her. Doubtless sympathy eased her somewhat, but
she was very low in thought and spirit, and wept silently and weakly for
a long time. We told her that either or both of us would now remain with
her all the time, and that seemed to comfort her. Towards dusk she fell
into a doze. Here a very odd thing occurred. Whilst still asleep she
took the paper from her breast and tore it in two. Van Helsing stepped
over and took the pieces from her. All the same, however, she went on
with the action of tearing, as though the material were still in her
hands; finally she lifted her hands and opened them as though scattering
the fragments. Van Helsing seemed surprised, and his brows gathered as
if in thought, but he said nothing.

       *       *       *       *       *

_19 September._--All last night she slept fitfully, being always afraid
to sleep, and something weaker when she woke from it. The Professor and
I took it in turns to watch, and we never left her for a moment
unattended. Quincey Morris said nothing about his intention, but I knew
that all night long he patrolled round and round the house.

When the day came, its searching light showed the ravages in poor Lucy's
strength. She was hardly able to turn her head, and the little
nourishment which she could take seemed to do her no good. At times she
slept, and both Van Helsing and I noticed the difference in her, between
sleeping and waking. Whilst asleep she looked stronger, although more
haggard, and her breathing was softer; her open mouth showed the pale
gums drawn back from the teeth, which thus looked positively longer and
sharper than usual; when she woke the softness of her eyes evidently
changed the expression, for she looked her own self, although a dying
one. In the afternoon she asked for Arthur, and we telegraphed for him.
Quincey went off to meet him at the station.

When he arrived it was nearly six o'clock, and the sun was setting full
and warm, and the red light streamed in through the window and gave more
colour to the pale cheeks. When he saw her, Arthur was simply choking
with emotion, and none of us could speak. In the hours that had passed,
the fits of sleep, or the comatose condition that passed for it, had
grown more frequent, so that the pauses when conversation was possible
were shortened. Arthur's presence, however, seemed to act as a
stimulant; she rallied a little, and spoke to him more brightly than she
had done since we arrived. He too pulled himself together, and spoke as
cheerily as he could, so that the best was made of everything.

It was now nearly one o'clock, and he and Van Helsing are sitting with
her. I am to relieve them in a quarter of an hour, and I am entering
this on Lucy's phonograph. Until six o'clock they are to try to rest. I
fear that to-morrow will end our watching, for the shock has been too
great; the poor child cannot rally. God help us all.


_Letter, Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra._

(Unopened by her.)

"_17 September._

"My dearest Lucy,--

"It seems _an age_ since I heard from you, or indeed since I wrote. You
will pardon me, I know, for all my faults when you have read all my
budget of news. Well, I got my husband back all right; when we arrived
at Exeter there was a carriage waiting for us, and in it, though he had
an attack of gout, Mr. Hawkins. He took us to his house, where there
were rooms for us all nice and comfortable, and we dined together. After
dinner Mr. Hawkins said:--

"'My dears, I want to drink your health and prosperity; and may every
blessing attend you both. I know you both from children, and have, with
love and pride, seen you grow up. Now I want you to make your home here
with me. I have left to me neither chick nor child; all are gone, and in
my will I have left you everything.' I cried, Lucy dear, as Jonathan and
the old man clasped hands. Our evening was a very, very happy one.

"So here we are, installed in this beautiful old house, and from both my
bedroom and the drawing-room I can see the great elms of the cathedral
close, with their great black stems standing out against the old yellow
stone of the cathedral and I can hear the rooks overhead cawing and
cawing and chattering and gossiping all day, after the manner of
rooks--and humans. I am busy, I need not tell you, arranging things and
housekeeping. Jonathan and Mr. Hawkins are busy all day; for, now that
Jonathan is a partner, Mr. Hawkins wants to tell him all about the
clients.

"How is your dear mother getting on? I wish I could run up to town for a
day or two to see you, dear, but I dare not go yet, with so much on my
shoulders; and Jonathan wants looking after still. He is beginning to
put some flesh on his bones again, but he was terribly weakened by the
long illness; even now he sometimes starts out of his sleep in a sudden
way and awakes all trembling until I can coax him back to his usual
placidity. However, thank God, these occasions grow less frequent as the
days go on, and they will in time pass away altogether, I trust. And now
I have told you my news, let me ask yours. When are you to be married,
and where, and who is to perform the ceremony, and what are you to wear,
and is it to be a public or a private wedding? Tell me all about it,
dear; tell me all about everything, for there is nothing which interests
you which will not be dear to me. Jonathan asks me to send his
'respectful duty,' but I do not think that is good enough from the
junior partner of the important firm Hawkins & Harker; and so, as you
love me, and he loves me, and I love you with all the moods and tenses
of the verb, I send you simply his 'love' instead. Good-bye, my dearest
Lucy, and all blessings on you.

"Yours,

"MINA HARKER."


_Report from Patrick Hennessey, M. D., M. R. C. S. L. K. Q. C. P. I.,
etc., etc., to John Seward, M. D._

"_20 September._

"My dear Sir,--

"In accordance with your wishes, I enclose report of the conditions of
everything left in my charge.... With regard to patient, Renfield, there
is more to say. He has had another outbreak, which might have had a
dreadful ending, but which, as it fortunately happened, was unattended
with any unhappy results. This afternoon a carrier's cart with two men
made a call at the empty house whose grounds abut on ours--the house to
which, you will remember, the patient twice ran away. The men stopped at
our gate to ask the porter their way, as they were strangers. I was
myself looking out of the study window, having a smoke after dinner, and
saw one of them come up to the house. As he passed the window of
Renfield's room, the patient began to rate him from within, and called
him all the foul names he could lay his tongue to. The man, who seemed a
decent fellow enough, contented himself by telling him to "shut up for a
foul-mouthed beggar," whereon our man accused him of robbing him and
wanting to murder him and said that he would hinder him if he were to
swing for it. I opened the window and signed to the man not to notice,
so he contented himself after looking the place over and making up his
mind as to what kind of a place he had got to by saying: 'Lor' bless
yer, sir, I wouldn't mind what was said to me in a bloomin' madhouse. I
pity ye and the guv'nor for havin' to live in the house with a wild
beast like that.' Then he asked his way civilly enough, and I told him
where the gate of the empty house was; he went away, followed by threats
and curses and revilings from our man. I went down to see if I could
make out any cause for his anger, since he is usually such a
well-behaved man, and except his violent fits nothing of the kind had
ever occurred. I found him, to my astonishment, quite composed and most
genial in his manner. I tried to get him to talk of the incident, but he
blandly asked me questions as to what I meant, and led me to believe
that he was completely oblivious of the affair. It was, I am sorry to
say, however, only another instance of his cunning, for within half an
hour I heard of him again. This time he had broken out through the
window of his room, and was running down the avenue. I called to the
attendants to follow me, and ran after him, for I feared he was intent
on some mischief. My fear was justified when I saw the same cart which
had passed before coming down the road, having on it some great wooden
boxes. The men were wiping their foreheads, and were flushed in the
face, as if with violent exercise. Before I could get up to him the
patient rushed at them, and pulling one of them off the cart, began to
knock his head against the ground. If I had not seized him just at the
moment I believe he would have killed the man there and then. The other
fellow jumped down and struck him over the head with the butt-end of his
heavy whip. It was a terrible blow; but he did not seem to mind it, but
seized him also, and struggled with the three of us, pulling us to and
fro as if we were kittens. You know I am no light weight, and the others
were both burly men. At first he was silent in his fighting; but as we
began to master him, and the attendants were putting a strait-waistcoat
on him, he began to shout: 'I'll frustrate them! They shan't rob me!
they shan't murder me by inches! I'll fight for my Lord and Master!' and
all sorts of similar incoherent ravings. It was with very considerable
difficulty that they got him back to the house and put him in the padded
room. One of the attendants, Hardy, had a finger broken. However, I set
it all right; and he is going on well.

"The two carriers were at first loud in their threats of actions for
damages, and promised to rain all the penalties of the law on us. Their
threats were, however, mingled with some sort of indirect apology for
the defeat of the two of them by a feeble madman. They said that if it
had not been for the way their strength had been spent in carrying and
raising the heavy boxes to the cart they would have made short work of
him. They gave as another reason for their defeat the extraordinary
state of drouth to which they had been reduced by the dusty nature of
their occupation and the reprehensible distance from the scene of their
labours of any place of public entertainment. I quite understood their
drift, and after a stiff glass of grog, or rather more of the same, and
with each a sovereign in hand, they made light of the attack, and swore
that they would encounter a worse madman any day for the pleasure of
meeting so 'bloomin' good a bloke' as your correspondent. I took their
names and addresses, in case they might be needed. They are as
follows:--Jack Smollet, of Dudding's Rents, King George's Road, Great
Walworth, and Thomas Snelling, Peter Farley's Row, Guide Court, Bethnal
Green. They are both in the employment of Harris & Sons, Moving and
Shipment Company, Orange Master's Yard, Soho.

"I shall report to you any matter of interest occurring here, and shall
wire you at once if there is anything of importance.

"Believe me, dear Sir,

"Yours faithfully,

"PATRICK HENNESSEY."


_Letter, Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra_.

(Unopened by her.)

"_18 September._

"My dearest Lucy,--

"Such a sad blow has befallen us. Mr. Hawkins has died very suddenly.
Some may not think it so sad for us, but we had both come to so love him
that it really seems as though we had lost a father. I never knew either
father or mother, so that the dear old man's death is a real blow to me.
Jonathan is greatly distressed. It is not only that he feels sorrow,
deep sorrow, for the dear, good man who has befriended him all his life,
and now at the end has treated him like his own son and left him a
fortune which to people of our modest bringing up is wealth beyond the
dream of avarice, but Jonathan feels it on another account. He says the
amount of responsibility which it puts upon him makes him nervous. He
begins to doubt himself. I try to cheer him up, and _my_ belief in _him_
helps him to have a belief in himself. But it is here that the grave
shock that he experienced tells upon him the most. Oh, it is too hard
that a sweet, simple, noble, strong nature such as his--a nature which
enabled him by our dear, good friend's aid to rise from clerk to master
in a few years--should be so injured that the very essence of its
strength is gone. Forgive me, dear, if I worry you with my troubles in
the midst of your own happiness; but, Lucy dear, I must tell some one,
for the strain of keeping up a brave and cheerful appearance to Jonathan
tries me, and I have no one here that I can confide in. I dread coming
up to London, as we must do the day after to-morrow; for poor Mr.
Hawkins left in his will that he was to be buried in the grave with his
father. As there are no relations at all, Jonathan will have to be chief
mourner. I shall try to run over to see you, dearest, if only for a few
minutes. Forgive me for troubling you. With all blessings,

"Your loving

"MINA HARKER."


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_20 September._--Only resolution and habit can let me make an entry
to-night. I am too miserable, too low-spirited, too sick of the world
and all in it, including life itself, that I would not care if I heard
this moment the flapping of the wings of the angel of death. And he has
been flapping those grim wings to some purpose of late--Lucy's mother
and Arthur's father, and now.... Let me get on with my work.

I duly relieved Van Helsing in his watch over Lucy. We wanted Arthur to
go to rest also, but he refused at first. It was only when I told him
that we should want him to help us during the day, and that we must not
all break down for want of rest, lest Lucy should suffer, that he agreed
to go. Van Helsing was very kind to him. "Come, my child," he said;
"come with me. You are sick and weak, and have had much sorrow and much
mental pain, as well as that tax on your strength that we know of. You
must not be alone; for to be alone is to be full of fears and alarms.
Come to the drawing-room, where there is a big fire, and there are two
sofas. You shall lie on one, and I on the other, and our sympathy will
be comfort to each other, even though we do not speak, and even if we
sleep." Arthur went off with him, casting back a longing look on Lucy's
face, which lay in her pillow, almost whiter than the lawn. She lay
quite still, and I looked round the room to see that all was as it
should be. I could see that the Professor had carried out in this room,
as in the other, his purpose of using the garlic; the whole of the
window-sashes reeked with it, and round Lucy's neck, over the silk
handkerchief which Van Helsing made her keep on, was a rough chaplet of
the same odorous flowers. Lucy was breathing somewhat stertorously, and
her face was at its worst, for the open mouth showed the pale gums. Her
teeth, in the dim, uncertain light, seemed longer and sharper than they
had been in the morning. In particular, by some trick of the light, the
canine teeth looked longer and sharper than the rest. I sat down by her,
and presently she moved uneasily. At the same moment there came a sort
of dull flapping or buffeting at the window. I went over to it softly,
and peeped out by the corner of the blind. There was a full moonlight,
and I could see that the noise was made by a great bat, which wheeled
round--doubtless attracted by the light, although so dim--and every now
and again struck the window with its wings. When I came back to my seat,
I found that Lucy had moved slightly, and had torn away the garlic
flowers from her throat. I replaced them as well as I could, and sat
watching her.

Presently she woke, and I gave her food, as Van Helsing had prescribed.
She took but a little, and that languidly. There did not seem to be with
her now the unconscious struggle for life and strength that had hitherto
so marked her illness. It struck me as curious that the moment she
became conscious she pressed the garlic flowers close to her. It was
certainly odd that whenever she got into that lethargic state, with the
stertorous breathing, she put the flowers from her; but that when she
waked she clutched them close. There was no possibility of making any
mistake about this, for in the long hours that followed, she had many
spells of sleeping and waking and repeated both actions many times.

At six o'clock Van Helsing came to relieve me. Arthur had then fallen
into a doze, and he mercifully let him sleep on. When he saw Lucy's face
I could hear the sissing indraw of his breath, and he said to me in a
sharp whisper: "Draw up the blind; I want light!" Then he bent down,
and, with his face almost touching Lucy's, examined her carefully. He
removed the flowers and lifted the silk handkerchief from her throat. As
he did so he started back, and I could hear his ejaculation, "Mein
Gott!" as it was smothered in his throat. I bent over and looked, too,
and as I noticed some queer chill came over me.

The wounds on the throat had absolutely disappeared.

For fully five minutes Van Helsing stood looking at her, with his face
at its sternest. Then he turned to me and said calmly:--

"She is dying. It will not be long now. It will be much difference, mark
me, whether she dies conscious or in her sleep. Wake that poor boy, and
let him come and see the last; he trusts us, and we have promised him."

I went to the dining-room and waked him. He was dazed for a moment, but
when he saw the sunlight streaming in through the edges of the shutters
he thought he was late, and expressed his fear. I assured him that Lucy
was still asleep, but told him as gently as I could that both Van
Helsing and I feared that the end was near. He covered his face with his
hands, and slid down on his knees by the sofa, where he remained,
perhaps a minute, with his head buried, praying, whilst his shoulders
shook with grief. I took him by the hand and raised him up. "Come," I
said, "my dear old fellow, summon all your fortitude: it will be best
and easiest for her."

When we came into Lucy's room I could see that Van Helsing had, with
his usual forethought, been putting matters straight and making
everything look as pleasing as possible. He had even brushed Lucy's
hair, so that it lay on the pillow in its usual sunny ripples. When we
came into the room she opened her eyes, and seeing him, whispered
softly:--

"Arthur! Oh, my love, I am so glad you have come!" He was stooping to
kiss her, when Van Helsing motioned him back. "No," he whispered, "not
yet! Hold her hand; it will comfort her more."

So Arthur took her hand and knelt beside her, and she looked her best,
with all the soft lines matching the angelic beauty of her eyes. Then
gradually her eyes closed, and she sank to sleep. For a little bit her
breast heaved softly, and her breath came and went like a tired child's.

And then insensibly there came the strange change which I had noticed in
the night. Her breathing grew stertorous, the mouth opened, and the pale
gums, drawn back, made the teeth look longer and sharper than ever. In a
sort of sleep-waking, vague, unconscious way she opened her eyes, which
were now dull and hard at once, and said in a soft, voluptuous voice,
such as I had never heard from her lips:--

"Arthur! Oh, my love, I am so glad you have come! Kiss me!" Arthur bent
eagerly over to kiss her; but at that instant Van Helsing, who, like me,
had been startled by her voice, swooped upon him, and catching him by
the neck with both hands, dragged him back with a fury of strength which
I never thought he could have possessed, and actually hurled him almost
across the room.

"Not for your life!" he said; "not for your living soul and hers!" And
he stood between them like a lion at bay.

Arthur was so taken aback that he did not for a moment know what to do
or say; and before any impulse of violence could seize him he realised
the place and the occasion, and stood silent, waiting.

I kept my eyes fixed on Lucy, as did Van Helsing, and we saw a spasm as
of rage flit like a shadow over her face; the sharp teeth champed
together. Then her eyes closed, and she breathed heavily.

Very shortly after she opened her eyes in all their softness, and
putting out her poor, pale, thin hand, took Van Helsing's great brown
one; drawing it to her, she kissed it. "My true friend," she said, in a
faint voice, but with untellable pathos, "My true friend, and his! Oh,
guard him, and give me peace!"

"I swear it!" he said solemnly, kneeling beside her and holding up his
hand, as one who registers an oath. Then he turned to Arthur, and said
to him: "Come, my child, take her hand in yours, and kiss her on the
forehead, and only once."

Their eyes met instead of their lips; and so they parted.

Lucy's eyes closed; and Van Helsing, who had been watching closely, took
Arthur's arm, and drew him away.

And then Lucy's breathing became stertorous again, and all at once it
ceased.

"It is all over," said Van Helsing. "She is dead!"

I took Arthur by the arm, and led him away to the drawing-room, where he
sat down, and covered his face with his hands, sobbing in a way that
nearly broke me down to see.

I went back to the room, and found Van Helsing looking at poor Lucy, and
his face was sterner than ever. Some change had come over her body.
Death had given back part of her beauty, for her brow and cheeks had
recovered some of their flowing lines; even the lips had lost their
deadly pallor. It was as if the blood, no longer needed for the working
of the heart, had gone to make the harshness of death as little rude as
might be.

    "We thought her dying whilst she slept,
        And sleeping when she died."

I stood beside Van Helsing, and said:--

"Ah, well, poor girl, there is peace for her at last. It is the end!"

He turned to me, and said with grave solemnity:--

"Not so; alas! not so. It is only the beginning!"

When I asked him what he meant, he only shook his head and answered:--

"We can do nothing as yet. Wait and see."




CHAPTER XIII

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY--_continued_.


The funeral was arranged for the next succeeding day, so that Lucy and
her mother might be buried together. I attended to all the ghastly
formalities, and the urbane undertaker proved that his staff were
afflicted--or blessed--with something of his own obsequious suavity.
Even the woman who performed the last offices for the dead remarked to
me, in a confidential, brother-professional way, when she had come out
from the death-chamber:--

"She makes a very beautiful corpse, sir. It's quite a privilege to
attend on her. It's not too much to say that she will do credit to our
establishment!"

I noticed that Van Helsing never kept far away. This was possible from
the disordered state of things in the household. There were no relatives
at hand; and as Arthur had to be back the next day to attend at his
father's funeral, we were unable to notify any one who should have been
bidden. Under the circumstances, Van Helsing and I took it upon
ourselves to examine papers, etc. He insisted upon looking over Lucy's
papers himself. I asked him why, for I feared that he, being a
foreigner, might not be quite aware of English legal requirements, and
so might in ignorance make some unnecessary trouble. He answered me:--

"I know; I know. You forget that I am a lawyer as well as a doctor. But
this is not altogether for the law. You knew that, when you avoided the
coroner. I have more than him to avoid. There may be papers more--such
as this."

As he spoke he took from his pocket-book the memorandum which had been
in Lucy's breast, and which she had torn in her sleep.

"When you find anything of the solicitor who is for the late Mrs.
Westenra, seal all her papers, and write him to-night. For me, I watch
here in the room and in Miss Lucy's old room all night, and I myself
search for what may be. It is not well that her very thoughts go into
the hands of strangers."

I went on with my part of the work, and in another half hour had found
the name and address of Mrs. Westenra's solicitor and had written to
him. All the poor lady's papers were in order; explicit directions
regarding the place of burial were given. I had hardly sealed the
letter, when, to my surprise, Van Helsing walked into the room,
saying:--

"Can I help you, friend John? I am free, and if I may, my service is to
you."

"Have you got what you looked for?" I asked, to which he replied:--

"I did not look for any specific thing. I only hoped to find, and find I
have, all that there was--only some letters and a few memoranda, and a
diary new begun. But I have them here, and we shall for the present say
nothing of them. I shall see that poor lad to-morrow evening, and, with
his sanction, I shall use some."

When we had finished the work in hand, he said to me:--

"And now, friend John, I think we may to bed. We want sleep, both you
and I, and rest to recuperate. To-morrow we shall have much to do, but
for the to-night there is no need of us. Alas!"

Before turning in we went to look at poor Lucy. The undertaker had
certainly done his work well, for the room was turned into a small
_chapelle ardente_. There was a wilderness of beautiful white flowers,
and death was made as little repulsive as might be. The end of the
winding-sheet was laid over the face; when the Professor bent over and
turned it gently back, we both started at the beauty before us, the tall
wax candles showing a sufficient light to note it well. All Lucy's
loveliness had come back to her in death, and the hours that had passed,
instead of leaving traces of "decay's effacing fingers," had but
restored the beauty of life, till positively I could not believe my eyes
that I was looking at a corpse.

The Professor looked sternly grave. He had not loved her as I had, and
there was no need for tears in his eyes. He said to me: "Remain till I
return," and left the room. He came back with a handful of wild garlic
from the box waiting in the hall, but which had not been opened, and
placed the flowers amongst the others on and around the bed. Then he
took from his neck, inside his collar, a little gold crucifix, and
placed it over the mouth. He restored the sheet to its place, and we
came away.

I was undressing in my own room, when, with a premonitory tap at the
door, he entered, and at once began to speak:--

"To-morrow I want you to bring me, before night, a set of post-mortem
knives."

"Must we make an autopsy?" I asked.

"Yes and no. I want to operate, but not as you think. Let me tell you
now, but not a word to another. I want to cut off her head and take out
her heart. Ah! you a surgeon, and so shocked! You, whom I have seen with
no tremble of hand or heart, do operations of life and death that make
the rest shudder. Oh, but I must not forget, my dear friend John, that
you loved her; and I have not forgotten it, for it is I that shall
operate, and you must only help. I would like to do it to-night, but for
Arthur I must not; he will be free after his father's funeral to-morrow,
and he will want to see her--to see _it_. Then, when she is coffined
ready for the next day, you and I shall come when all sleep. We shall
unscrew the coffin-lid, and shall do our operation: and then replace
all, so that none know, save we alone."

"But why do it at all? The girl is dead. Why mutilate her poor body
without need? And if there is no necessity for a post-mortem and nothing
to gain by it--no good to her, to us, to science, to human
knowledge--why do it? Without such it is monstrous."

For answer he put his hand on my shoulder, and said, with infinite
tenderness:--

"Friend John, I pity your poor bleeding heart; and I love you the more
because it does so bleed. If I could, I would take on myself the burden
that you do bear. But there are things that you know not, but that you
shall know, and bless me for knowing, though they are not pleasant
things. John, my child, you have been my friend now many years, and yet
did you ever know me to do any without good cause? I may err--I am but
man; but I believe in all I do. Was it not for these causes that you
send for me when the great trouble came? Yes! Were you not amazed, nay
horrified, when I would not let Arthur kiss his love--though she was
dying--and snatched him away by all my strength? Yes! And yet you saw
how she thanked me, with her so beautiful dying eyes, her voice, too, so
weak, and she kiss my rough old hand and bless me? Yes! And did you not
hear me swear promise to her, that so she closed her eyes grateful? Yes!

"Well, I have good reason now for all I want to do. You have for many
years trust me; you have believe me weeks past, when there be things so
strange that you might have well doubt. Believe me yet a little, friend
John. If you trust me not, then I must tell what I think; and that is
not perhaps well. And if I work--as work I shall, no matter trust or no
trust--without my friend trust in me, I work with heavy heart and feel,
oh! so lonely when I want all help and courage that may be!" He paused a
moment and went on solemnly: "Friend John, there are strange and
terrible days before us. Let us not be two, but one, that so we work to
a good end. Will you not have faith in me?"

I took his hand, and promised him. I held my door open as he went away,
and watched him go into his room and close the door. As I stood without
moving, I saw one of the maids pass silently along the passage--she had
her back towards me, so did not see me--and go into the room where Lucy
lay. The sight touched me. Devotion is so rare, and we are so grateful
to those who show it unasked to those we love. Here was a poor girl
putting aside the terrors which she naturally had of death to go watch
alone by the bier of the mistress whom she loved, so that the poor clay
might not be lonely till laid to eternal rest....

       *       *       *       *       *

I must have slept long and soundly, for it was broad daylight when Van
Helsing waked me by coming into my room. He came over to my bedside and
said:--

"You need not trouble about the knives; we shall not do it."

"Why not?" I asked. For his solemnity of the night before had greatly
impressed me.

"Because," he said sternly, "it is too late--or too early. See!" Here he
held up the little golden crucifix. "This was stolen in the night."

"How, stolen," I asked in wonder, "since you have it now?"

"Because I get it back from the worthless wretch who stole it, from the
woman who robbed the dead and the living. Her punishment will surely
come, but not through me; she knew not altogether what she did and thus
unknowing, she only stole. Now we must wait."

He went away on the word, leaving me with a new mystery to think of, a
new puzzle to grapple with.

The forenoon was a dreary time, but at noon the solicitor came: Mr.
Marquand, of Wholeman, Sons, Marquand & Lidderdale. He was very genial
and very appreciative of what we had done, and took off our hands all
cares as to details. During lunch he told us that Mrs. Westenra had for
some time expected sudden death from her heart, and had put her affairs
in absolute order; he informed us that, with the exception of a certain
entailed property of Lucy's father's which now, in default of direct
issue, went back to a distant branch of the family, the whole estate,
real and personal, was left absolutely to Arthur Holmwood. When he had
told us so much he went on:--

"Frankly we did our best to prevent such a testamentary disposition, and
pointed out certain contingencies that might leave her daughter either
penniless or not so free as she should be to act regarding a matrimonial
alliance. Indeed, we pressed the matter so far that we almost came into
collision, for she asked us if we were or were not prepared to carry out
her wishes. Of course, we had then no alternative but to accept. We were
right in principle, and ninety-nine times out of a hundred we should
have proved, by the logic of events, the accuracy of our judgment.
Frankly, however, I must admit that in this case any other form of
disposition would have rendered impossible the carrying out of her
wishes. For by her predeceasing her daughter the latter would have come
into possession of the property, and, even had she only survived her
mother by five minutes, her property would, in case there were no
will--and a will was a practical impossibility in such a case--have been
treated at her decease as under intestacy. In which case Lord Godalming,
though so dear a friend, would have had no claim in the world; and the
inheritors, being remote, would not be likely to abandon their just
rights, for sentimental reasons regarding an entire stranger. I assure
you, my dear sirs, I am rejoiced at the result, perfectly rejoiced."

He was a good fellow, but his rejoicing at the one little part--in which
he was officially interested--of so great a tragedy, was an
object-lesson in the limitations of sympathetic understanding.

He did not remain long, but said he would look in later in the day and
see Lord Godalming. His coming, however, had been a certain comfort to
us, since it assured us that we should not have to dread hostile
criticism as to any of our acts. Arthur was expected at five o'clock, so
a little before that time we visited the death-chamber. It was so in
very truth, for now both mother and daughter lay in it. The undertaker,
true to his craft, had made the best display he could of his goods, and
there was a mortuary air about the place that lowered our spirits at
once. Van Helsing ordered the former arrangement to be adhered to,
explaining that, as Lord Godalming was coming very soon, it would be
less harrowing to his feelings to see all that was left of his _fiancée_
quite alone. The undertaker seemed shocked at his own stupidity and
exerted himself to restore things to the condition in which we left them
the night before, so that when Arthur came such shocks to his feelings
as we could avoid were saved.

Poor fellow! He looked desperately sad and broken; even his stalwart
manhood seemed to have shrunk somewhat under the strain of his
much-tried emotions. He had, I knew, been very genuinely and devotedly
attached to his father; and to lose him, and at such a time, was a
bitter blow to him. With me he was warm as ever, and to Van Helsing he
was sweetly courteous; but I could not help seeing that there was some
constraint with him. The Professor noticed it, too, and motioned me to
bring him upstairs. I did so, and left him at the door of the room, as I
felt he would like to be quite alone with her, but he took my arm and
led me in, saying huskily:--

"You loved her too, old fellow; she told me all about it, and there was
no friend had a closer place in her heart than you. I don't know how to
thank you for all you have done for her. I can't think yet...."

Here he suddenly broke down, and threw his arms round my shoulders and
laid his head on my breast, crying:--

"Oh, Jack! Jack! What shall I do! The whole of life seems gone from me
all at once, and there is nothing in the wide world for me to live for."

I comforted him as well as I could. In such cases men do not need much
expression. A grip of the hand, the tightening of an arm over the
shoulder, a sob in unison, are expressions of sympathy dear to a man's
heart. I stood still and silent till his sobs died away, and then I said
softly to him:--

"Come and look at her."

Together we moved over to the bed, and I lifted the lawn from her face.
God! how beautiful she was. Every hour seemed to be enhancing her
loveliness. It frightened and amazed me somewhat; and as for Arthur, he
fell a-trembling, and finally was shaken with doubt as with an ague. At
last, after a long pause, he said to me in a faint whisper:--

"Jack, is she really dead?"

I assured him sadly that it was so, and went on to suggest--for I felt
that such a horrible doubt should not have life for a moment longer than
I could help--that it often happened that after death faces became
softened and even resolved into their youthful beauty; that this was
especially so when death had been preceded by any acute or prolonged
suffering. It seemed to quite do away with any doubt, and, after
kneeling beside the couch for a while and looking at her lovingly and
long, he turned aside. I told him that that must be good-bye, as the
coffin had to be prepared; so he went back and took her dead hand in his
and kissed it, and bent over and kissed her forehead. He came away,
fondly looking back over his shoulder at her as he came.

I left him in the drawing-room, and told Van Helsing that he had said
good-bye; so the latter went to the kitchen to tell the undertaker's men
to proceed with the preparations and to screw up the coffin. When he
came out of the room again I told him of Arthur's question, and he
replied:--

"I am not surprised. Just now I doubted for a moment myself!"

We all dined together, and I could see that poor Art was trying to make
the best of things. Van Helsing had been silent all dinner-time; but
when we had lit our cigars he said--

"Lord----"; but Arthur interrupted him:--

"No, no, not that, for God's sake! not yet at any rate. Forgive me, sir:
I did not mean to speak offensively; it is only because my loss is so
recent."

The Professor answered very sweetly:--

"I only used that name because I was in doubt. I must not call you
'Mr.,' and I have grown to love you--yes, my dear boy, to love you--as
Arthur."

Arthur held out his hand, and took the old man's warmly.

"Call me what you will," he said. "I hope I may always have the title of
a friend. And let me say that I am at a loss for words to thank you for
your goodness to my poor dear." He paused a moment, and went on: "I know
that she understood your goodness even better than I do; and if I was
rude or in any way wanting at that time you acted so--you remember"--the
Professor nodded--"you must forgive me."

He answered with a grave kindness:--

"I know it was hard for you to quite trust me then, for to trust such
violence needs to understand; and I take it that you do not--that you
cannot--trust me now, for you do not yet understand. And there may be
more times when I shall want you to trust when you cannot--and may
not--and must not yet understand. But the time will come when your trust
shall be whole and complete in me, and when you shall understand as
though the sunlight himself shone through. Then you shall bless me from
first to last for your own sake, and for the sake of others and for her
dear sake to whom I swore to protect."

"And, indeed, indeed, sir," said Arthur warmly, "I shall in all ways
trust you. I know and believe you have a very noble heart, and you are
Jack's friend, and you were hers. You shall do what you like."

The Professor cleared his throat a couple of times, as though about to
speak, and finally said:--

"May I ask you something now?"

"Certainly."

"You know that Mrs. Westenra left you all her property?"

"No, poor dear; I never thought of it."

"And as it is all yours, you have a right to deal with it as you will. I
want you to give me permission to read all Miss Lucy's papers and
letters. Believe me, it is no idle curiosity. I have a motive of which,
be sure, she would have approved. I have them all here. I took them
before we knew that all was yours, so that no strange hand might touch
them--no strange eye look through words into her soul. I shall keep
them, if I may; even you may not see them yet, but I shall keep them
safe. No word shall be lost; and in the good time I shall give them back
to you. It's a hard thing I ask, but you will do it, will you not, for
Lucy's sake?"

Arthur spoke out heartily, like his old self:--

"Dr. Van Helsing, you may do what you will. I feel that in saying this I
am doing what my dear one would have approved. I shall not trouble you
with questions till the time comes."

The old Professor stood up as he said solemnly:--

"And you are right. There will be pain for us all; but it will not be
all pain, nor will this pain be the last. We and you too--you most of
all, my dear boy--will have to pass through the bitter water before we
reach the sweet. But we must be brave of heart and unselfish, and do our
duty, and all will be well!"

I slept on a sofa in Arthur's room that night. Van Helsing did not go to
bed at all. He went to and fro, as if patrolling the house, and was
never out of sight of the room where Lucy lay in her coffin, strewn with
the wild garlic flowers, which sent, through the odour of lily and rose,
a heavy, overpowering smell into the night.


_Mina Harker's Journal._

_22 September._--In the train to Exeter. Jonathan sleeping.

It seems only yesterday that the last entry was made, and yet how much
between then, in Whitby and all the world before me, Jonathan away and
no news of him; and now, married to Jonathan, Jonathan a solicitor, a
partner, rich, master of his business, Mr. Hawkins dead and buried, and
Jonathan with another attack that may harm him. Some day he may ask me
about it. Down it all goes. I am rusty in my shorthand--see what
unexpected prosperity does for us--so it may be as well to freshen it up
again with an exercise anyhow....

The service was very simple and very solemn. There were only ourselves
and the servants there, one or two old friends of his from Exeter, his
London agent, and a gentleman representing Sir John Paxton, the
President of the Incorporated Law Society. Jonathan and I stood hand in
hand, and we felt that our best and dearest friend was gone from us....

We came back to town quietly, taking a 'bus to Hyde Park Corner.
Jonathan thought it would interest me to go into the Row for a while, so
we sat down; but there were very few people there, and it was
sad-looking and desolate to see so many empty chairs. It made us think
of the empty chair at home; so we got up and walked down Piccadilly.
Jonathan was holding me by the arm, the way he used to in old days
before I went to school. I felt it very improper, for you can't go on
for some years teaching etiquette and decorum to other girls without the
pedantry of it biting into yourself a bit; but it was Jonathan, and he
was my husband, and we didn't know anybody who saw us--and we didn't
care if they did--so on we walked. I was looking at a very beautiful
girl, in a big cart-wheel hat, sitting in a victoria outside Guiliano's,
when I felt Jonathan clutch my arm so tight that he hurt me, and he said
under his breath: "My God!" I am always anxious about Jonathan, for I
fear that some nervous fit may upset him again; so I turned to him
quickly, and asked him what it was that disturbed him.

He was very pale, and his eyes seemed bulging out as, half in terror and
half in amazement, he gazed at a tall, thin man, with a beaky nose and
black moustache and pointed beard, who was also observing the pretty
girl. He was looking at her so hard that he did not see either of us,
and so I had a good view of him. His face was not a good face; it was
hard, and cruel, and sensual, and his big white teeth, that looked all
the whiter because his lips were so red, were pointed like an animal's.
Jonathan kept staring at him, till I was afraid he would notice. I
feared he might take it ill, he looked so fierce and nasty. I asked
Jonathan why he was disturbed, and he answered, evidently thinking that
I knew as much about it as he did: "Do you see who it is?"

"No, dear," I said; "I don't know him; who is it?" His answer seemed to
shock and thrill me, for it was said as if he did not know that it was
to me, Mina, to whom he was speaking:--

"It is the man himself!"

The poor dear was evidently terrified at something--very greatly
terrified; I do believe that if he had not had me to lean on and to
support him he would have sunk down. He kept staring; a man came out of
the shop with a small parcel, and gave it to the lady, who then drove
off. The dark man kept his eyes fixed on her, and when the carriage
moved up Piccadilly he followed in the same direction, and hailed a
hansom. Jonathan kept looking after him, and said, as if to himself:--

"I believe it is the Count, but he has grown young. My God, if this be
so! Oh, my God! my God! If I only knew! if I only knew!" He was
distressing himself so much that I feared to keep his mind on the
subject by asking him any questions, so I remained silent. I drew him
away quietly, and he, holding my arm, came easily. We walked a little
further, and then went in and sat for a while in the Green Park. It was
a hot day for autumn, and there was a comfortable seat in a shady place.
After a few minutes' staring at nothing, Jonathan's eyes closed, and he
went quietly into a sleep, with his head on my shoulder. I thought it
was the best thing for him, so did not disturb him. In about twenty
minutes he woke up, and said to me quite cheerfully:--

"Why, Mina, have I been asleep! Oh, do forgive me for being so rude.
Come, and we'll have a cup of tea somewhere." He had evidently forgotten
all about the dark stranger, as in his illness he had forgotten all that
this episode had reminded him of. I don't like this lapsing into
forgetfulness; it may make or continue some injury to the brain. I must
not ask him, for fear I shall do more harm than good; but I must somehow
learn the facts of his journey abroad. The time is come, I fear, when I
must open that parcel, and know what is written. Oh, Jonathan, you will,
I know, forgive me if I do wrong, but it is for your own dear sake.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--A sad home-coming in every way--the house empty of the dear
soul who was so good to us; Jonathan still pale and dizzy under a slight
relapse of his malady; and now a telegram from Van Helsing, whoever he
may be:--

"You will be grieved to hear that Mrs. Westenra died five days ago, and
that Lucy died the day before yesterday. They were both buried to-day."

Oh, what a wealth of sorrow in a few words! Poor Mrs. Westenra! poor
Lucy! Gone, gone, never to return to us! And poor, poor Arthur, to have
lost such sweetness out of his life! God help us all to bear our
troubles.


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_22 September._--It is all over. Arthur has gone back to Ring, and has
taken Quincey Morris with him. What a fine fellow is Quincey! I believe
in my heart of hearts that he suffered as much about Lucy's death as any
of us; but he bore himself through it like a moral Viking. If America
can go on breeding men like that, she will be a power in the world
indeed. Van Helsing is lying down, having a rest preparatory to his
journey. He goes over to Amsterdam to-night, but says he returns
to-morrow night; that he only wants to make some arrangements which can
only be made personally. He is to stop with me then, if he can; he says
he has work to do in London which may take him some time. Poor old
fellow! I fear that the strain of the past week has broken down even his
iron strength. All the time of the burial he was, I could see, putting
some terrible restraint on himself. When it was all over, we were
standing beside Arthur, who, poor fellow, was speaking of his part in
the operation where his blood had been transfused to his Lucy's veins; I
could see Van Helsing's face grow white and purple by turns. Arthur was
saying that he felt since then as if they two had been really married
and that she was his wife in the sight of God. None of us said a word of
the other operations, and none of us ever shall. Arthur and Quincey went
away together to the station, and Van Helsing and I came on here. The
moment we were alone in the carriage he gave way to a regular fit of
hysterics. He has denied to me since that it was hysterics, and insisted
that it was only his sense of humour asserting itself under very
terrible conditions. He laughed till he cried, and I had to draw down
the blinds lest any one should see us and misjudge; and then he cried,
till he laughed again; and laughed and cried together, just as a woman
does. I tried to be stern with him, as one is to a woman under the
circumstances; but it had no effect. Men and women are so different in
manifestations of nervous strength or weakness! Then when his face grew
grave and stern again I asked him why his mirth, and why at such a time.
His reply was in a way characteristic of him, for it was logical and
forceful and mysterious. He said:--

"Ah, you don't comprehend, friend John. Do not think that I am not sad,
though I laugh. See, I have cried even when the laugh did choke me. But
no more think that I am all sorry when I cry, for the laugh he come
just the same. Keep it always with you that laughter who knock at your
door and say, 'May I come in?' is not the true laughter. No! he is a
king, and he come when and how he like. He ask no person; he choose no
time of suitability. He say, 'I am here.' Behold, in example I grieve my
heart out for that so sweet young girl; I give my blood for her, though
I am old and worn; I give my time, my skill, my sleep; I let my other
sufferers want that so she may have all. And yet I can laugh at her very
grave--laugh when the clay from the spade of the sexton drop upon her
coffin and say 'Thud! thud!' to my heart, till it send back the blood
from my cheek. My heart bleed for that poor boy--that dear boy, so of
the age of mine own boy had I been so blessed that he live, and with his
hair and eyes the same. There, you know now why I love him so. And yet
when he say things that touch my husband-heart to the quick, and make my
father-heart yearn to him as to no other man--not even to you, friend
John, for we are more level in experiences than father and son--yet even
at such moment King Laugh he come to me and shout and bellow in my ear,
'Here I am! here I am!' till the blood come dance back and bring some of
the sunshine that he carry with him to my cheek. Oh, friend John, it is
a strange world, a sad world, a world full of miseries, and woes, and
troubles; and yet when King Laugh come he make them all dance to the
tune he play. Bleeding hearts, and dry bones of the churchyard, and
tears that burn as they fall--all dance together to the music that he
make with that smileless mouth of him. And believe me, friend John, that
he is good to come, and kind. Ah, we men and women are like ropes drawn
tight with strain that pull us different ways. Then tears come; and,
like the rain on the ropes, they brace us up, until perhaps the strain
become too great, and we break. But King Laugh he come like the
sunshine, and he ease off the strain again; and we bear to go on with
our labour, what it may be."

I did not like to wound him by pretending not to see his idea; but, as I
did not yet understand the cause of his laughter, I asked him. As he
answered me his face grew stern, and he said in quite a different
tone:--

"Oh, it was the grim irony of it all--this so lovely lady garlanded with
flowers, that looked so fair as life, till one by one we wondered if she
were truly dead; she laid in that so fine marble house in that lonely
churchyard, where rest so many of her kin, laid there with the mother
who loved her, and whom she loved; and that sacred bell going 'Toll!
toll! toll!' so sad and slow; and those holy men, with the white
garments of the angel, pretending to read books, and yet all the time
their eyes never on the page; and all of us with the bowed head. And all
for what? She is dead; so! Is it not?"

"Well, for the life of me, Professor," I said, "I can't see anything to
laugh at in all that. Why, your explanation makes it a harder puzzle
than before. But even if the burial service was comic, what about poor
Art and his trouble? Why, his heart was simply breaking."

"Just so. Said he not that the transfusion of his blood to her veins had
made her truly his bride?"

"Yes, and it was a sweet and comforting idea for him."

"Quite so. But there was a difficulty, friend John. If so that, then
what about the others? Ho, ho! Then this so sweet maid is a polyandrist,
and me, with my poor wife dead to me, but alive by Church's law, though
no wits, all gone--even I, who am faithful husband to this now-no-wife,
am bigamist."

"I don't see where the joke comes in there either!" I said; and I did
not feel particularly pleased with him for saying such things. He laid
his hand on my arm, and said:--

"Friend John, forgive me if I pain. I showed not my feeling to others
when it would wound, but only to you, my old friend, whom I can trust.
If you could have looked into my very heart then when I want to laugh;
if you could have done so when the laugh arrived; if you could do so
now, when King Laugh have pack up his crown, and all that is to him--for
he go far, far away from me, and for a long, long time--maybe you would
perhaps pity me the most of all."

I was touched by the tenderness of his tone, and asked why.

"Because I know!"

And now we are all scattered; and for many a long day loneliness will
sit over our roofs with brooding wings. Lucy lies in the tomb of her
kin, a lordly death-house in a lonely churchyard, away from teeming
London; where the air is fresh, and the sun rises over Hampstead Hill,
and where wild flowers grow of their own accord.

So I can finish this diary; and God only knows if I shall ever begin
another. If I do, or if I even open this again, it will be to deal with
different people and different themes; for here at the end, where the
romance of my life is told, ere I go back to take up the thread of my
life-work, I say sadly and without hope,

                        "FINIS."


_"The Westminster Gazette," 25 September._

                          A HAMPSTEAD MYSTERY.


The neighbourhood of Hampstead is just at present exercised with a
series of events which seem to run on lines parallel to those of what
was known to the writers of headlines as "The Kensington Horror," or
"The Stabbing Woman," or "The Woman in Black." During the past two or
three days several cases have occurred of young children straying from
home or neglecting to return from their playing on the Heath. In all
these cases the children were too young to give any properly
intelligible account of themselves, but the consensus of their excuses
is that they had been with a "bloofer lady." It has always been late in
the evening when they have been missed, and on two occasions the
children have not been found until early in the following morning. It is
generally supposed in the neighbourhood that, as the first child missed
gave as his reason for being away that a "bloofer lady" had asked him to
come for a walk, the others had picked up the phrase and used it as
occasion served. This is the more natural as the favourite game of the
little ones at present is luring each other away by wiles. A
correspondent writes us that to see some of the tiny tots pretending to
be the "bloofer lady" is supremely funny. Some of our caricaturists
might, he says, take a lesson in the irony of grotesque by comparing the
reality and the picture. It is only in accordance with general
principles of human nature that the "bloofer lady" should be the popular
rôle at these _al fresco_ performances. Our correspondent naïvely says
that even Ellen Terry could not be so winningly attractive as some of
these grubby-faced little children pretend--and even imagine
themselves--to be.

There is, however, possibly a serious side to the question, for some of
the children, indeed all who have been missed at night, have been
slightly torn or wounded in the throat. The wounds seem such as might be
made by a rat or a small dog, and although of not much importance
individually, would tend to show that whatever animal inflicts them has
a system or method of its own. The police of the division have been
instructed to keep a sharp look-out for straying children, especially
when very young, in and around Hampstead Heath, and for any stray dog
which may be about.


               _"The Westminster Gazette," 25 September._

                            _Extra Special._

                         THE HAMPSTEAD HORROR.

                         ANOTHER CHILD INJURED.

                         _The "Bloofer Lady."_

We have just received intelligence that another child, missed last
night, was only discovered late in the morning under a furze bush at the
Shooter's Hill side of Hampstead Heath, which is, perhaps, less
frequented than the other parts. It has the same tiny wound in the
throat as has been noticed in other cases. It was terribly weak, and
looked quite emaciated. It too, when partially restored, had the common
story to tell of being lured away by the "bloofer lady."




CHAPTER XIV

MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL


_23 September_.--Jonathan is better after a bad night. I am so glad that
he has plenty of work to do, for that keeps his mind off the terrible
things; and oh, I am rejoiced that he is not now weighed down with the
responsibility of his new position. I knew he would be true to himself,
and now how proud I am to see my Jonathan rising to the height of his
advancement and keeping pace in all ways with the duties that come upon
him. He will be away all day till late, for he said he could not lunch
at home. My household work is done, so I shall take his foreign journal,
and lock myself up in my room and read it....


_24 September_.--I hadn't the heart to write last night; that terrible
record of Jonathan's upset me so. Poor dear! How he must have suffered,
whether it be true or only imagination. I wonder if there is any truth
in it at all. Did he get his brain fever, and then write all those
terrible things, or had he some cause for it all? I suppose I shall
never know, for I dare not open the subject to him.... And yet that man
we saw yesterday! He seemed quite certain of him.... Poor fellow! I
suppose it was the funeral upset him and sent his mind back on some
train of thought.... He believes it all himself. I remember how on our
wedding-day he said: "Unless some solemn duty come upon me to go back to
the bitter hours, asleep or awake, mad or sane." There seems to be
through it all some thread of continuity.... That fearful Count was
coming to London.... If it should be, and he came to London, with his
teeming millions.... There may be a solemn duty; and if it come we must
not shrink from it.... I shall be prepared. I shall get my typewriter
this very hour and begin transcribing. Then we shall be ready for other
eyes if required. And if it be wanted; then, perhaps, if I am ready,
poor Jonathan may not be upset, for I can speak for him and never let
him be troubled or worried with it at all. If ever Jonathan quite gets
over the nervousness he may want to tell me of it all, and I can ask him
questions and find out things, and see how I may comfort him.


_Letter, Van Helsing to Mrs. Harker._

"_24 September._

(_Confidence_)

"Dear Madam,--

"I pray you to pardon my writing, in that I am so far friend as that I
sent to you sad news of Miss Lucy Westenra's death. By the kindness of
Lord Godalming, I am empowered to read her letters and papers, for I am
deeply concerned about certain matters vitally important. In them I find
some letters from you, which show how great friends you were and how you
love her. Oh, Madam Mina, by that love, I implore you, help me. It is
for others' good that I ask--to redress great wrong, and to lift much
and terrible troubles--that may be more great than you can know. May it
be that I see you? You can trust me. I am friend of Dr. John Seward and
of Lord Godalming (that was Arthur of Miss Lucy). I must keep it private
for the present from all. I should come to Exeter to see you at once if
you tell me I am privilege to come, and where and when. I implore your
pardon, madam. I have read your letters to poor Lucy, and know how good
you are and how your husband suffer; so I pray you, if it may be,
enlighten him not, lest it may harm. Again your pardon, and forgive me.

"VAN HELSING."


_Telegram, Mrs. Harker to Van Helsing._

"_25 September._--Come to-day by quarter-past ten train if you can catch
it. Can see you any time you call.

"WILHELMINA HARKER."

MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL.

_25 September._--I cannot help feeling terribly excited as the time
draws near for the visit of Dr. Van Helsing, for somehow I expect that
it will throw some light upon Jonathan's sad experience; and as he
attended poor dear Lucy in her last illness, he can tell me all about
her. That is the reason of his coming; it is concerning Lucy and her
sleep-walking, and not about Jonathan. Then I shall never know the real
truth now! How silly I am. That awful journal gets hold of my
imagination and tinges everything with something of its own colour. Of
course it is about Lucy. That habit came back to the poor dear, and that
awful night on the cliff must have made her ill. I had almost forgotten
in my own affairs how ill she was afterwards. She must have told him
of her sleep-walking adventure on the cliff, and that I knew all about
it; and now he wants me to tell him what she knows, so that he may
understand. I hope I did right in not saying anything of it to Mrs.
Westenra; I should never forgive myself if any act of mine, were it even
a negative one, brought harm on poor dear Lucy. I hope, too, Dr. Van
Helsing will not blame me; I have had so much trouble and anxiety of
late that I feel I cannot bear more just at present.

I suppose a cry does us all good at times--clears the air as other rain
does. Perhaps it was reading the journal yesterday that upset me, and
then Jonathan went away this morning to stay away from me a whole day
and night, the first time we have been parted since our marriage. I do
hope the dear fellow will take care of himself, and that nothing will
occur to upset him. It is two o'clock, and the doctor will be here soon
now. I shall say nothing of Jonathan's journal unless he asks me. I am
so glad I have type-written out my own journal, so that, in case he asks
about Lucy, I can hand it to him; it will save much questioning.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--He has come and gone. Oh, what a strange meeting, and how it
all makes my head whirl round! I feel like one in a dream. Can it be all
possible, or even a part of it? If I had not read Jonathan's journal
first, I should never have accepted even a possibility. Poor, poor, dear
Jonathan! How he must have suffered. Please the good God, all this may
not upset him again. I shall try to save him from it; but it may be even
a consolation and a help to him--terrible though it be and awful in its
consequences--to know for certain that his eyes and ears and brain did
not deceive him, and that it is all true. It may be that it is the doubt
which haunts him; that when the doubt is removed, no matter
which--waking or dreaming--may prove the truth, he will be more
satisfied and better able to bear the shock. Dr. Van Helsing must be a
good man as well as a clever one if he is Arthur's friend and Dr.
Seward's, and if they brought him all the way from Holland to look after
Lucy. I feel from having seen him that he _is_ good and kind and of a
noble nature. When he comes to-morrow I shall ask him about Jonathan;
and then, please God, all this sorrow and anxiety may lead to a good
end. I used to think I would like to practise interviewing; Jonathan's
friend on "The Exeter News" told him that memory was everything in such
work--that you must be able to put down exactly almost every word
spoken, even if you had to refine some of it afterwards. Here was a rare
interview; I shall try to record it _verbatim_.

It was half-past two o'clock when the knock came. I took my courage _à
deux mains_ and waited. In a few minutes Mary opened the door, and
announced "Dr. Van Helsing."

I rose and bowed, and he came towards me; a man of medium weight,
strongly built, with his shoulders set back over a broad, deep chest and
a neck well balanced on the trunk as the head is on the neck. The poise
of the head strikes one at once as indicative of thought and power; the
head is noble, well-sized, broad, and large behind the ears. The face,
clean-shaven, shows a hard, square chin, a large, resolute, mobile
mouth, a good-sized nose, rather straight, but with quick, sensitive
nostrils, that seem to broaden as the big, bushy brows come down and the
mouth tightens. The forehead is broad and fine, rising at first almost
straight and then sloping back above two bumps or ridges wide apart;
such a forehead that the reddish hair cannot possibly tumble over it,
but falls naturally back and to the sides. Big, dark blue eyes are set
widely apart, and are quick and tender or stern with the man's moods. He
said to me:--

"Mrs. Harker, is it not?" I bowed assent.

"That was Miss Mina Murray?" Again I assented.

"It is Mina Murray that I came to see that was friend of that poor dear
child Lucy Westenra. Madam Mina, it is on account of the dead I come."

"Sir," I said, "you could have no better claim on me than that you were
a friend and helper of Lucy Westenra." And I held out my hand. He took
it and said tenderly:--

"Oh, Madam Mina, I knew that the friend of that poor lily girl must be
good, but I had yet to learn----" He finished his speech with a courtly
bow. I asked him what it was that he wanted to see me about, so he at
once began:--

"I have read your letters to Miss Lucy. Forgive me, but I had to begin
to inquire somewhere, and there was none to ask. I know that you were
with her at Whitby. She sometimes kept a diary--you need not look
surprised, Madam Mina; it was begun after you had left, and was in
imitation of you--and in that diary she traces by inference certain
things to a sleep-walking in which she puts down that you saved her. In
great perplexity then I come to you, and ask you out of your so much
kindness to tell me all of it that you can remember."

"I can tell you, I think, Dr. Van Helsing, all about it."

"Ah, then you have good memory for facts, for details? It is not always
so with young ladies."

"No, doctor, but I wrote it all down at the time. I can show it to you
if you like."

"Oh, Madam Mina, I will be grateful; you will do me much favour." I
could not resist the temptation of mystifying him a bit--I suppose it is
some of the taste of the original apple that remains still in our
mouths--so I handed him the shorthand diary. He took it with a grateful
bow, and said:--

"May I read it?"

"If you wish," I answered as demurely as I could. He opened it, and for
an instant his face fell. Then he stood up and bowed.

"Oh, you so clever woman!" he said. "I knew long that Mr. Jonathan was a
man of much thankfulness; but see, his wife have all the good things.
And will you not so much honour me and so help me as to read it for me?
Alas! I know not the shorthand." By this time my little joke was over,
and I was almost ashamed; so I took the typewritten copy from my
workbasket and handed it to him.

"Forgive me," I said: "I could not help it; but I had been thinking that
it was of dear Lucy that you wished to ask, and so that you might not
have time to wait--not on my account, but because I know your time must
be precious--I have written it out on the typewriter for you."

He took it and his eyes glistened. "You are so good," he said. "And may
I read it now? I may want to ask you some things when I have read."

"By all means," I said, "read it over whilst I order lunch; and then you
can ask me questions whilst we eat." He bowed and settled himself in a
chair with his back to the light, and became absorbed in the papers,
whilst I went to see after lunch chiefly in order that he might not be
disturbed. When I came back, I found him walking hurriedly up and down
the room, his face all ablaze with excitement. He rushed up to me and
took me by both hands.

"Oh, Madam Mina," he said, "how can I say what I owe to you? This paper
is as sunshine. It opens the gate to me. I am daze, I am dazzle, with so
much light, and yet clouds roll in behind the light every time. But that
you do not, cannot, comprehend. Oh, but I am grateful to you, you so
clever woman. Madam"--he said this very solemnly--"if ever Abraham Van
Helsing can do anything for you or yours, I trust you will let me know.
It will be pleasure and delight if I may serve you as a friend; as a
friend, but all I have ever learned, all I can ever do, shall be for you
and those you love. There are darknesses in life, and there are lights;
you are one of the lights. You will have happy life and good life, and
your husband will be blessed in you."

"But, doctor, you praise me too much, and--and you do not know me."

"Not know you--I, who am old, and who have studied all my life men and
women; I, who have made my specialty the brain and all that belongs to
him and all that follow from him! And I have read your diary that you
have so goodly written for me, and which breathes out truth in every
line. I, who have read your so sweet letter to poor Lucy of your
marriage and your trust, not know you! Oh, Madam Mina, good women tell
all their lives, and by day and by hour and by minute, such things that
angels can read; and we men who wish to know have in us something of
angels' eyes. Your husband is noble nature, and you are noble too, for
you trust, and trust cannot be where there is mean nature. And your
husband--tell me of him. Is he quite well? Is all that fever gone, and
is he strong and hearty?" I saw here an opening to ask him about
Jonathan, so I said:--

"He was almost recovered, but he has been greatly upset by Mr. Hawkins's
death." He interrupted:--

"Oh, yes, I know, I know. I have read your last two letters." I went
on:--

"I suppose this upset him, for when we were in town on Thursday last he
had a sort of shock."

"A shock, and after brain fever so soon! That was not good. What kind of
a shock was it?"

"He thought he saw some one who recalled something terrible, something
which led to his brain fever." And here the whole thing seemed to
overwhelm me in a rush. The pity for Jonathan, the horror which he
experienced, the whole fearful mystery of his diary, and the fear that
has been brooding over me ever since, all came in a tumult. I suppose I
was hysterical, for I threw myself on my knees and held up my hands to
him, and implored him to make my husband well again. He took my hands
and raised me up, and made me sit on the sofa, and sat by me; he held my
hand in his, and said to me with, oh, such infinite sweetness:--

"My life is a barren and lonely one, and so full of work that I have not
had much time for friendships; but since I have been summoned to here by
my friend John Seward I have known so many good people and seen such
nobility that I feel more than ever--and it has grown with my advancing
years--the loneliness of my life. Believe, me, then, that I come here
full of respect for you, and you have given me hope--hope, not in what I
am seeking of, but that there are good women still left to make life
happy--good women, whose lives and whose truths may make good lesson for
the children that are to be. I am glad, glad, that I may here be of some
use to you; for if your husband suffer, he suffer within the range of my
study and experience. I promise you that I will gladly do _all_ for him
that I can--all to make his life strong and manly, and your life a happy
one. Now you must eat. You are overwrought and perhaps over-anxious.
Husband Jonathan would not like to see you so pale; and what he like not
where he love, is not to his good. Therefore for his sake you must eat
and smile. You have told me all about Lucy, and so now we shall not
speak of it, lest it distress. I shall stay in Exeter to-night, for I
want to think much over what you have told me, and when I have thought I
will ask you questions, if I may. And then, too, you will tell me of
husband Jonathan's trouble so far as you can, but not yet. You must eat
now; afterwards you shall tell me all."

After lunch, when we went back to the drawing-room, he said to me:--

"And now tell me all about him." When it came to speaking to this great
learned man, I began to fear that he would think me a weak fool, and
Jonathan a madman--that journal is all so strange--and I hesitated to go
on. But he was so sweet and kind, and he had promised to help, and I
trusted him, so I said:--

"Dr. Van Helsing, what I have to tell you is so queer that you must not
laugh at me or at my husband. I have been since yesterday in a sort of
fever of doubt; you must be kind to me, and not think me foolish that I
have even half believed some very strange things." He reassured me by
his manner as well as his words when he said:--

"Oh, my dear, if you only know how strange is the matter regarding which
I am here, it is you who would laugh. I have learned not to think little
of any one's belief, no matter how strange it be. I have tried to keep
an open mind; and it is not the ordinary things of life that could close
it, but the strange things, the extraordinary things, the things that
make one doubt if they be mad or sane."

"Thank you, thank you, a thousand times! You have taken a weight off my
mind. If you will let me, I shall give you a paper to read. It is long,
but I have typewritten it out. It will tell you my trouble and
Jonathan's. It is the copy of his journal when abroad, and all that
happened. I dare not say anything of it; you will read for yourself and
judge. And then when I see you, perhaps, you will be very kind and tell
me what you think."

"I promise," he said as I gave him the papers; "I shall in the morning,
so soon as I can, come to see you and your husband, if I may."

"Jonathan will be here at half-past eleven, and you must come to lunch
with us and see him then; you could catch the quick 3:34 train, which
will leave you at Paddington before eight." He was surprised at my
knowledge of the trains off-hand, but he does not know that I have made
up all the trains to and from Exeter, so that I may help Jonathan in
case he is in a hurry.

So he took the papers with him and went away, and I sit here
thinking--thinking I don't know what.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Letter (by hand), Van Helsing to Mrs. Harker._

"_25 September, 6 o'clock._

"Dear Madam Mina,--

"I have read your husband's so wonderful diary. You may sleep without
doubt. Strange and terrible as it is, it is _true_! I will pledge my
life on it. It may be worse for others; but for him and you there is no
dread. He is a noble fellow; and let me tell you from experience of men,
that one who would do as he did in going down that wall and to that
room--ay, and going a second time--is not one to be injured in
permanence by a shock. His brain and his heart are all right; this I
swear, before I have even seen him; so be at rest. I shall have much to
ask him of other things. I am blessed that to-day I come to see you, for
I have learn all at once so much that again I am dazzle--dazzle more
than ever, and I must think.

"Yours the most faithful,

"ABRAHAM VAN HELSING."


_Letter, Mrs. Harker to Van Helsing._

"_25 September, 6:30 p. m._

"My dear Dr. Van Helsing,--

"A thousand thanks for your kind letter, which has taken a great weight
off my mind. And yet, if it be true, what terrible things there are in
the world, and what an awful thing if that man, that monster, be really
in London! I fear to think. I have this moment, whilst writing, had a
wire from Jonathan, saying that he leaves by the 6:25 to-night from
Launceston and will be here at 10:18, so that I shall have no fear
to-night. Will you, therefore, instead of lunching with us, please come
to breakfast at eight o'clock, if this be not too early for you? You can
get away, if you are in a hurry, by the 10:30 train, which will bring
you to Paddington by 2:35. Do not answer this, as I shall take it that,
if I do not hear, you will come to breakfast.

"Believe me,

"Your faithful and grateful friend,

"MINA HARKER."


_Jonathan Harker's Journal._

_26 September._--I thought never to write in this diary again, but the
time has come. When I got home last night Mina had supper ready, and
when we had supped she told me of Van Helsing's visit, and of her having
given him the two diaries copied out, and of how anxious she has been
about me. She showed me in the doctor's letter that all I wrote down was
true. It seems to have made a new man of me. It was the doubt as to the
reality of the whole thing that knocked me over. I felt impotent, and in
the dark, and distrustful. But, now that I _know_, I am not afraid, even
of the Count. He has succeeded after all, then, in his design in getting
to London, and it was he I saw. He has got younger, and how? Van Helsing
is the man to unmask him and hunt him out, if he is anything like what
Mina says. We sat late, and talked it all over. Mina is dressing, and I
shall call at the hotel in a few minutes and bring him over....

He was, I think, surprised to see me. When I came into the room where he
was, and introduced myself, he took me by the shoulder, and turned my
face round to the light, and said, after a sharp scrutiny:--

"But Madam Mina told me you were ill, that you had had a shock." It was
so funny to hear my wife called "Madam Mina" by this kindly,
strong-faced old man. I smiled, and said:--

"I _was_ ill, I _have_ had a shock; but you have cured me already."

"And how?"

"By your letter to Mina last night. I was in doubt, and then everything
took a hue of unreality, and I did not know what to trust, even the
evidence of my own senses. Not knowing what to trust, I did not know
what to do; and so had only to keep on working in what had hitherto been
the groove of my life. The groove ceased to avail me, and I mistrusted
myself. Doctor, you don't know what it is to doubt everything, even
yourself. No, you don't; you couldn't with eyebrows like yours." He
seemed pleased, and laughed as he said:--

"So! You are physiognomist. I learn more here with each hour. I am with
so much pleasure coming to you to breakfast; and, oh, sir, you will
pardon praise from an old man, but you are blessed in your wife." I
would listen to him go on praising Mina for a day, so I simply nodded
and stood silent.

"She is one of God's women, fashioned by His own hand to show us men and
other women that there is a heaven where we can enter, and that its
light can be here on earth. So true, so sweet, so noble, so little an
egoist--and that, let me tell you, is much in this age, so sceptical and
selfish. And you, sir--I have read all the letters to poor Miss Lucy,
and some of them speak of you, so I know you since some days from the
knowing of others; but I have seen your true self since last night. You
will give me your hand, will you not? And let us be friends for all our
lives."

We shook hands, and he was so earnest and so kind that it made me quite
choky.

"And now," he said, "may I ask you for some more help? I have a great
task to do, and at the beginning it is to know. You can help me here.
Can you tell me what went before your going to Transylvania? Later on I
may ask more help, and of a different kind; but at first this will do."

"Look here, sir," I said, "does what you have to do concern the Count?"

"It does," he said solemnly.

"Then I am with you heart and soul. As you go by the 10:30 train, you
will not have time to read them; but I shall get the bundle of papers.
You can take them with you and read them in the train."

After breakfast I saw him to the station. When we were parting he
said:--

"Perhaps you will come to town if I send to you, and take Madam Mina
too."

"We shall both come when you will," I said.

I had got him the morning papers and the London papers of the previous
night, and while we were talking at the carriage window, waiting for the
train to start, he was turning them over. His eyes suddenly seemed to
catch something in one of them, "The Westminster Gazette"--I knew it by
the colour--and he grew quite white. He read something intently,
groaning to himself: "Mein Gott! Mein Gott! So soon! so soon!" I do not
think he remembered me at the moment. Just then the whistle blew, and
the train moved off. This recalled him to himself, and he leaned out of
the window and waved his hand, calling out: "Love to Madam Mina; I shall
write so soon as ever I can."


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_26 September._--Truly there is no such thing as finality. Not a week
since I said "Finis," and yet here I am starting fresh again, or rather
going on with the same record. Until this afternoon I had no cause to
think of what is done. Renfield had become, to all intents, as sane as
he ever was. He was already well ahead with his fly business; and he had
just started in the spider line also; so he had not been of any trouble
to me. I had a letter from Arthur, written on Sunday, and from it I
gather that he is bearing up wonderfully well. Quincey Morris is with
him, and that is much of a help, for he himself is a bubbling well of
good spirits. Quincey wrote me a line too, and from him I hear that
Arthur is beginning to recover something of his old buoyancy; so as to
them all my mind is at rest. As for myself, I was settling down to my
work with the enthusiasm which I used to have for it, so that I might
fairly have said that the wound which poor Lucy left on me was becoming
cicatrised. Everything is, however, now reopened; and what is to be the
end God only knows. I have an idea that Van Helsing thinks he knows,
too, but he will only let out enough at a time to whet curiosity. He
went to Exeter yesterday, and stayed there all night. To-day he came
back, and almost bounded into the room at about half-past five o'clock,
and thrust last night's "Westminster Gazette" into my hand.

"What do you think of that?" he asked as he stood back and folded his
arms.

I looked over the paper, for I really did not know what he meant; but he
took it from me and pointed out a paragraph about children being decoyed
away at Hampstead. It did not convey much to me, until I reached a
passage where it described small punctured wounds on their throats. An
idea struck me, and I looked up. "Well?" he said.

"It is like poor Lucy's."

"And what do you make of it?"

"Simply that there is some cause in common. Whatever it was that injured
her has injured them." I did not quite understand his answer:--

"That is true indirectly, but not directly."

"How do you mean, Professor?" I asked. I was a little inclined to take
his seriousness lightly--for, after all, four days of rest and freedom
from burning, harrowing anxiety does help to restore one's spirits--but
when I saw his face, it sobered me. Never, even in the midst of our
despair about poor Lucy, had he looked more stern.

"Tell me!" I said. "I can hazard no opinion. I do not know what to
think, and I have no data on which to found a conjecture."

"Do you mean to tell me, friend John, that you have no suspicion as to
what poor Lucy died of; not after all the hints given, not only by
events, but by me?"

"Of nervous prostration following on great loss or waste of blood."

"And how the blood lost or waste?" I shook my head. He stepped over and
sat down beside me, and went on:--

"You are clever man, friend John; you reason well, and your wit is bold;
but you are too prejudiced. You do not let your eyes see nor your ears
hear, and that which is outside your daily life is not of account to
you. Do you not think that there are things which you cannot understand,
and yet which are; that some people see things that others cannot? But
there are things old and new which must not be contemplate by men's
eyes, because they know--or think they know--some things which other men
have told them. Ah, it is the fault of our science that it wants to
explain all; and if it explain not, then it says there is nothing to
explain. But yet we see around us every day the growth of new beliefs,
which think themselves new; and which are yet but the old, which pretend
to be young--like the fine ladies at the opera. I suppose now you do not
believe in corporeal transference. No? Nor in materialisation. No? Nor
in astral bodies. No? Nor in the reading of thought. No? Nor in
hypnotism----"

"Yes," I said. "Charcot has proved that pretty well." He smiled as he
went on: "Then you are satisfied as to it. Yes? And of course then you
understand how it act, and can follow the mind of the great
Charcot--alas that he is no more!--into the very soul of the patient
that he influence. No? Then, friend John, am I to take it that you
simply accept fact, and are satisfied to let from premise to conclusion
be a blank? No? Then tell me--for I am student of the brain--how you
accept the hypnotism and reject the thought reading. Let me tell you, my
friend, that there are things done to-day in electrical science which
would have been deemed unholy by the very men who discovered
electricity--who would themselves not so long before have been burned
as wizards. There are always mysteries in life. Why was it that
Methuselah lived nine hundred years, and 'Old Parr' one hundred and
sixty-nine, and yet that poor Lucy, with four men's blood in her poor
veins, could not live even one day? For, had she live one more day, we
could have save her. Do you know all the mystery of life and death? Do
you know the altogether of comparative anatomy and can say wherefore the
qualities of brutes are in some men, and not in others? Can you tell me
why, when other spiders die small and soon, that one great spider lived
for centuries in the tower of the old Spanish church and grew and grew,
till, on descending, he could drink the oil of all the church lamps? Can
you tell me why in the Pampas, ay and elsewhere, there are bats that
come at night and open the veins of cattle and horses and suck dry their
veins; how in some islands of the Western seas there are bats which hang
on the trees all day, and those who have seen describe as like giant
nuts or pods, and that when the sailors sleep on the deck, because that
it is hot, flit down on them, and then--and then in the morning are
found dead men, white as even Miss Lucy was?"

"Good God, Professor!" I said, starting up. "Do you mean to tell me that
Lucy was bitten by such a bat; and that such a thing is here in London
in the nineteenth century?" He waved his hand for silence, and went
on:--

"Can you tell me why the tortoise lives more long than generations of
men; why the elephant goes on and on till he have seen dynasties; and
why the parrot never die only of bite of cat or dog or other complaint?
Can you tell me why men believe in all ages and places that there are
some few who live on always if they be permit; that there are men and
women who cannot die? We all know--because science has vouched for the
fact--that there have been toads shut up in rocks for thousands of
years, shut in one so small hole that only hold him since the youth of
the world. Can you tell me how the Indian fakir can make himself to die
and have been buried, and his grave sealed and corn sowed on it, and the
corn reaped and be cut and sown and reaped and cut again, and then men
come and take away the unbroken seal and that there lie the Indian
fakir, not dead, but that rise up and walk amongst them as before?" Here
I interrupted him. I was getting bewildered; he so crowded on my mind
his list of nature's eccentricities and possible impossibilities that my
imagination was getting fired. I had a dim idea that he was teaching me
some lesson, as long ago he used to do in his study at Amsterdam; but
he used then to tell me the thing, so that I could have the object of
thought in mind all the time. But now I was without this help, yet I
wanted to follow him, so I said:--

"Professor, let me be your pet student again. Tell me the thesis, so
that I may apply your knowledge as you go on. At present I am going in
my mind from point to point as a mad man, and not a sane one, follows an
idea. I feel like a novice lumbering through a bog in a mist, jumping
from one tussock to another in the mere blind effort to move on without
knowing where I am going."

"That is good image," he said. "Well, I shall tell you. My thesis is
this: I want you to believe."

"To believe what?"

"To believe in things that you cannot. Let me illustrate. I heard once
of an American who so defined faith: 'that faculty which enables us to
believe things which we know to be untrue.' For one, I follow that man.
He meant that we shall have an open mind, and not let a little bit of
truth check the rush of a big truth, like a small rock does a railway
truck. We get the small truth first. Good! We keep him, and we value
him; but all the same we must not let him think himself all the truth in
the universe."

"Then you want me not to let some previous conviction injure the
receptivity of my mind with regard to some strange matter. Do I read
your lesson aright?"

"Ah, you are my favourite pupil still. It is worth to teach you. Now
that you are willing to understand, you have taken the first step to
understand. You think then that those so small holes in the children's
throats were made by the same that made the hole in Miss Lucy?"

"I suppose so." He stood up and said solemnly:--

"Then you are wrong. Oh, would it were so! but alas! no. It is worse,
far, far worse."

"In God's name, Professor Van Helsing, what do you mean?" I cried.

He threw himself with a despairing gesture into a chair, and placed his
elbows on the table, covering his face with his hands as he spoke:--

"They were made by Miss Lucy!"




CHAPTER XV

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY--_continued_.


For a while sheer anger mastered me; it was as if he had during her life
struck Lucy on the face. I smote the table hard and rose up as I said to
him:--

"Dr. Van Helsing, are you mad?" He raised his head and looked at me, and
somehow the tenderness of his face calmed me at once. "Would I were!" he
said. "Madness were easy to bear compared with truth like this. Oh, my
friend, why, think you, did I go so far round, why take so long to tell
you so simple a thing? Was it because I hate you and have hated you all
my life? Was it because I wished to give you pain? Was it that I wanted,
now so late, revenge for that time when you saved my life, and from a
fearful death? Ah no!"

"Forgive me," said I. He went on:--

"My friend, it was because I wished to be gentle in the breaking to you,
for I know you have loved that so sweet lady. But even yet I do not
expect you to believe. It is so hard to accept at once any abstract
truth, that we may doubt such to be possible when we have always
believed the 'no' of it; it is more hard still to accept so sad a
concrete truth, and of such a one as Miss Lucy. To-night I go to prove
it. Dare you come with me?"

This staggered me. A man does not like to prove such a truth; Byron
excepted from the category, jealousy.

    "And prove the very truth he most abhorred."

He saw my hesitation, and spoke:--

"The logic is simple, no madman's logic this time, jumping from tussock
to tussock in a misty bog. If it be not true, then proof will be relief;
at worst it will not harm. If it be true! Ah, there is the dread; yet
very dread should help my cause, for in it is some need of belief. Come,
I tell you what I propose: first, that we go off now and see that child
in the hospital. Dr. Vincent, of the North Hospital, where the papers
say the child is, is friend of mine, and I think of yours since you were
in class at Amsterdam. He will let two scientists see his case, if he
will not let two friends. We shall tell him nothing, but only that we
wish to learn. And then----"

"And then?" He took a key from his pocket and held it up. "And then we
spend the night, you and I, in the churchyard where Lucy lies. This is
the key that lock the tomb. I had it from the coffin-man to give to
Arthur." My heart sank within me, for I felt that there was some fearful
ordeal before us. I could do nothing, however, so I plucked up what
heart I could and said that we had better hasten, as the afternoon was
passing....

We found the child awake. It had had a sleep and taken some food, and
altogether was going on well. Dr. Vincent took the bandage from its
throat, and showed us the punctures. There was no mistaking the
similarity to those which had been on Lucy's throat. They were smaller,
and the edges looked fresher; that was all. We asked Vincent to what he
attributed them, and he replied that it must have been a bite of some
animal, perhaps a rat; but, for his own part, he was inclined to think
that it was one of the bats which are so numerous on the northern
heights of London. "Out of so many harmless ones," he said, "there may
be some wild specimen from the South of a more malignant species. Some
sailor may have brought one home, and it managed to escape; or even from
the Zoölogical Gardens a young one may have got loose, or one be bred
there from a vampire. These things do occur, you know. Only ten days ago
a wolf got out, and was, I believe, traced up in this direction. For a
week after, the children were playing nothing but Red Riding Hood on the
Heath and in every alley in the place until this 'bloofer lady' scare
came along, since when it has been quite a gala-time with them. Even
this poor little mite, when he woke up to-day, asked the nurse if he
might go away. When she asked him why he wanted to go, he said he wanted
to play with the 'bloofer lady.'"

"I hope," said Van Helsing, "that when you are sending the child home
you will caution its parents to keep strict watch over it. These fancies
to stray are most dangerous; and if the child were to remain out another
night, it would probably be fatal. But in any case I suppose you will
not let it away for some days?"

"Certainly not, not for a week at least; longer if the wound is not
healed."

Our visit to the hospital took more time than we had reckoned on, and
the sun had dipped before we came out. When Van Helsing saw how dark it
was, he said:--

"There is no hurry. It is more late than I thought. Come, let us seek
somewhere that we may eat, and then we shall go on our way."

We dined at "Jack Straw's Castle" along with a little crowd of
bicyclists and others who were genially noisy. About ten o'clock we
started from the inn. It was then very dark, and the scattered lamps
made the darkness greater when we were once outside their individual
radius. The Professor had evidently noted the road we were to go, for he
went on unhesitatingly; but, as for me, I was in quite a mixup as to
locality. As we went further, we met fewer and fewer people, till at
last we were somewhat surprised when we met even the patrol of horse
police going their usual suburban round. At last we reached the wall of
the churchyard, which we climbed over. With some little difficulty--for
it was very dark, and the whole place seemed so strange to us--we found
the Westenra tomb. The Professor took the key, opened the creaky door,
and standing back, politely, but quite unconsciously, motioned me to
precede him. There was a delicious irony in the offer, in the
courtliness of giving preference on such a ghastly occasion. My
companion followed me quickly, and cautiously drew the door to, after
carefully ascertaining that the lock was a falling, and not a spring,
one. In the latter case we should have been in a bad plight. Then he
fumbled in his bag, and taking out a matchbox and a piece of candle,
proceeded to make a light. The tomb in the day-time, and when wreathed
with fresh flowers, had looked grim and gruesome enough; but now, some
days afterwards, when the flowers hung lank and dead, their whites
turning to rust and their greens to browns; when the spider and the
beetle had resumed their accustomed dominance; when time-discoloured
stone, and dust-encrusted mortar, and rusty, dank iron, and tarnished
brass, and clouded silver-plating gave back the feeble glimmer of a
candle, the effect was more miserable and sordid than could have been
imagined. It conveyed irresistibly the idea that life--animal life--was
not the only thing which could pass away.

Van Helsing went about his work systematically. Holding his candle so
that he could read the coffin plates, and so holding it that the sperm
dropped in white patches which congealed as they touched the metal, he
made assurance of Lucy's coffin. Another search in his bag, and he took
out a turnscrew.

"What are you going to do?" I asked.

"To open the coffin. You shall yet be convinced." Straightway he began
taking out the screws, and finally lifted off the lid, showing the
casing of lead beneath. The sight was almost too much for me. It seemed
to be as much an affront to the dead as it would have been to have
stripped off her clothing in her sleep whilst living; I actually took
hold of his hand to stop him. He only said: "You shall see," and again
fumbling in his bag, took out a tiny fret-saw. Striking the turnscrew
through the lead with a swift downward stab, which made me wince, he
made a small hole, which was, however, big enough to admit the point of
the saw. I had expected a rush of gas from the week-old corpse. We
doctors, who have had to study our dangers, have to become accustomed to
such things, and I drew back towards the door. But the Professor never
stopped for a moment; he sawed down a couple of feet along one side of
the lead coffin, and then across, and down the other side. Taking the
edge of the loose flange, he bent it back towards the foot of the
coffin, and holding up the candle into the aperture, motioned to me to
look.

I drew near and looked. The coffin was empty.

It was certainly a surprise to me, and gave me a considerable shock, but
Van Helsing was unmoved. He was now more sure than ever of his ground,
and so emboldened to proceed in his task. "Are you satisfied now, friend
John?" he asked.

I felt all the dogged argumentativeness of my nature awake within me as
I answered him:--

"I am satisfied that Lucy's body is not in that coffin; but that only
proves one thing."

"And what is that, friend John?"

"That it is not there."

"That is good logic," he said, "so far as it goes. But how do you--how
can you--account for it not being there?"

"Perhaps a body-snatcher," I suggested. "Some of the undertaker's people
may have stolen it." I felt that I was speaking folly, and yet it was
the only real cause which I could suggest. The Professor sighed. "Ah
well!" he said, "we must have more proof. Come with me."

He put on the coffin-lid again, gathered up all his things and placed
them in the bag, blew out the light, and placed the candle also in the
bag. We opened the door, and went out. Behind us he closed the door and
locked it. He handed me the key, saying: "Will you keep it? You had
better be assured." I laughed--it was not a very cheerful laugh, I am
bound to say--as I motioned him to keep it. "A key is nothing," I said;
"there may be duplicates; and anyhow it is not difficult to pick a lock
of that kind." He said nothing, but put the key in his pocket. Then he
told me to watch at one side of the churchyard whilst he would watch at
the other. I took up my place behind a yew-tree, and I saw his dark
figure move until the intervening headstones and trees hid it from my
sight.

It was a lonely vigil. Just after I had taken my place I heard a distant
clock strike twelve, and in time came one and two. I was chilled and
unnerved, and angry with the Professor for taking me on such an errand
and with myself for coming. I was too cold and too sleepy to be keenly
observant, and not sleepy enough to betray my trust so altogether I had
a dreary, miserable time.

Suddenly, as I turned round, I thought I saw something like a white
streak, moving between two dark yew-trees at the side of the churchyard
farthest from the tomb; at the same time a dark mass moved from the
Professor's side of the ground, and hurriedly went towards it. Then I
too moved; but I had to go round headstones and railed-off tombs, and I
stumbled over graves. The sky was overcast, and somewhere far off an
early cock crew. A little way off, beyond a line of scattered
juniper-trees, which marked the pathway to the church, a white, dim
figure flitted in the direction of the tomb. The tomb itself was hidden
by trees, and I could not see where the figure disappeared. I heard the
rustle of actual movement where I had first seen the white figure, and
coming over, found the Professor holding in his arms a tiny child. When
he saw me he held it out to me, and said:--

"Are you satisfied now?"

"No," I said, in a way that I felt was aggressive.

"Do you not see the child?"

"Yes, it is a child, but who brought it here? And is it wounded?" I
asked.

"We shall see," said the Professor, and with one impulse we took our way
out of the churchyard, he carrying the sleeping child.

When we had got some little distance away, we went into a clump of
trees, and struck a match, and looked at the child's throat. It was
without a scratch or scar of any kind.

"Was I right?" I asked triumphantly.

"We were just in time," said the Professor thankfully.

We had now to decide what we were to do with the child, and so consulted
about it. If we were to take it to a police-station we should have to
give some account of our movements during the night; at least, we should
have had to make some statement as to how we had come to find the child.
So finally we decided that we would take it to the Heath, and when we
heard a policeman coming, would leave it where he could not fail to find
it; we would then seek our way home as quickly as we could. All fell out
well. At the edge of Hampstead Heath we heard a policeman's heavy
tramp, and laying the child on the pathway, we waited and watched until
he saw it as he flashed his lantern to and fro. We heard his exclamation
of astonishment, and then we went away silently. By good chance we got a
cab near the "Spaniards," and drove to town.

I cannot sleep, so I make this entry. But I must try to get a few hours'
sleep, as Van Helsing is to call for me at noon. He insists that I shall
go with him on another expedition.

       *       *       *       *       *

_27 September._--It was two o'clock before we found a suitable
opportunity for our attempt. The funeral held at noon was all completed,
and the last stragglers of the mourners had taken themselves lazily
away, when, looking carefully from behind a clump of alder-trees, we saw
the sexton lock the gate after him. We knew then that we were safe till
morning did we desire it; but the Professor told me that we should not
want more than an hour at most. Again I felt that horrid sense of the
reality of things, in which any effort of imagination seemed out of
place; and I realised distinctly the perils of the law which we were
incurring in our unhallowed work. Besides, I felt it was all so useless.
Outrageous as it was to open a leaden coffin, to see if a woman dead
nearly a week were really dead, it now seemed the height of folly to
open the tomb again, when we knew, from the evidence of our own
eyesight, that the coffin was empty. I shrugged my shoulders, however,
and rested silent, for Van Helsing had a way of going on his own road,
no matter who remonstrated. He took the key, opened the vault, and again
courteously motioned me to precede. The place was not so gruesome as
last night, but oh, how unutterably mean-looking when the sunshine
streamed in. Van Helsing walked over to Lucy's coffin, and I followed.
He bent over and again forced back the leaden flange; and then a shock
of surprise and dismay shot through me.

There lay Lucy, seemingly just as we had seen her the night before her
funeral. She was, if possible, more radiantly beautiful than ever; and I
could not believe that she was dead. The lips were red, nay redder than
before; and on the cheeks was a delicate bloom.

"Is this a juggle?" I said to him.

"Are you convinced now?" said the Professor in response, and as he spoke
he put over his hand, and in a way that made me shudder, pulled back the
dead lips and showed the white teeth.

"See," he went on, "see, they are even sharper than before. With this
and this"--and he touched one of the canine teeth and that below
it--"the little children can be bitten. Are you of belief now, friend
John?" Once more, argumentative hostility woke within me. I _could_ not
accept such an overwhelming idea as he suggested; so, with an attempt to
argue of which I was even at the moment ashamed, I said:--

"She may have been placed here since last night."

"Indeed? That is so, and by whom?"

"I do not know. Some one has done it."

"And yet she has been dead one week. Most peoples in that time would not
look so." I had no answer for this, so was silent. Van Helsing did not
seem to notice my silence; at any rate, he showed neither chagrin nor
triumph. He was looking intently at the face of the dead woman, raising
the eyelids and looking at the eyes, and once more opening the lips and
examining the teeth. Then he turned to me and said:--

"Here, there is one thing which is different from all recorded; here is
some dual life that is not as the common. She was bitten by the vampire
when she was in a trance, sleep-walking--oh, you start; you do not know
that, friend John, but you shall know it all later--and in trance could
he best come to take more blood. In trance she died, and in trance she
is Un-Dead, too. So it is that she differ from all other. Usually when
the Un-Dead sleep at home"--as he spoke he made a comprehensive sweep of
his arm to designate what to a vampire was "home"--"their face show what
they are, but this so sweet that was when she not Un-Dead she go back to
the nothings of the common dead. There is no malign there, see, and so
it make hard that I must kill her in her sleep." This turned my blood
cold, and it began to dawn upon me that I was accepting Van Helsing's
theories; but if she were really dead, what was there of terror in the
idea of killing her? He looked up at me, and evidently saw the change in
my face, for he said almost joyously:--

"Ah, you believe now?"

I answered: "Do not press me too hard all at once. I am willing to
accept. How will you do this bloody work?"

"I shall cut off her head and fill her mouth with garlic, and I shall
drive a stake through her body." It made me shudder to think of so
mutilating the body of the woman whom I had loved. And yet the feeling
was not so strong as I had expected. I was, in fact, beginning to
shudder at the presence of this being, this Un-Dead, as Van Helsing
called it, and to loathe it. Is it possible that love is all subjective,
or all objective?

I waited a considerable time for Van Helsing to begin, but he stood as
if wrapped in thought. Presently he closed the catch of his bag with a
snap, and said:--

"I have been thinking, and have made up my mind as to what is best. If I
did simply follow my inclining I would do now, at this moment, what is
to be done; but there are other things to follow, and things that are
thousand times more difficult in that them we do not know. This is
simple. She have yet no life taken, though that is of time; and to act
now would be to take danger from her for ever. But then we may have to
want Arthur, and how shall we tell him of this? If you, who saw the
wounds on Lucy's throat, and saw the wounds so similar on the child's at
the hospital; if you, who saw the coffin empty last night and full
to-day with a woman who have not change only to be more rose and more
beautiful in a whole week, after she die--if you know of this and know
of the white figure last night that brought the child to the churchyard,
and yet of your own senses you did not believe, how, then, can I expect
Arthur, who know none of those things, to believe? He doubted me when I
took him from her kiss when she was dying. I know he has forgiven me
because in some mistaken idea I have done things that prevent him say
good-bye as he ought; and he may think that in some more mistaken idea
this woman was buried alive; and that in most mistake of all we have
killed her. He will then argue back that it is we, mistaken ones, that
have killed her by our ideas; and so he will be much unhappy always. Yet
he never can be sure; and that is the worst of all. And he will
sometimes think that she he loved was buried alive, and that will paint
his dreams with horrors of what she must have suffered; and again, he
will think that we may be right, and that his so beloved was, after all,
an Un-Dead. No! I told him once, and since then I learn much. Now, since
I know it is all true, a hundred thousand times more do I know that he
must pass through the bitter waters to reach the sweet. He, poor fellow,
must have one hour that will make the very face of heaven grow black to
him; then we can act for good all round and send him peace. My mind is
made up. Let us go. You return home for to-night to your asylum, and see
that all be well. As for me, I shall spend the night here in this
churchyard in my own way. To-morrow night you will come to me to the
Berkeley Hotel at ten of the clock. I shall send for Arthur to come too,
and also that so fine young man of America that gave his blood. Later we
shall all have work to do. I come with you so far as Piccadilly and
there dine, for I must be back here before the sun set."

So we locked the tomb and came away, and got over the wall of the
churchyard, which was not much of a task, and drove back to Piccadilly.


_Note left by Van Helsing in his portmanteau, Berkeley Hotel directed to
John Seward, M. D._

(Not delivered.)

"_27 September._

"Friend John,--

"I write this in case anything should happen. I go alone to watch in
that churchyard. It pleases me that the Un-Dead, Miss Lucy, shall not
leave to-night, that so on the morrow night she may be more eager.
Therefore I shall fix some things she like not--garlic and a
crucifix--and so seal up the door of the tomb. She is young as Un-Dead,
and will heed. Moreover, these are only to prevent her coming out; they
may not prevail on her wanting to get in; for then the Un-Dead is
desperate, and must find the line of least resistance, whatsoever it may
be. I shall be at hand all the night from sunset till after the sunrise,
and if there be aught that may be learned I shall learn it. For Miss
Lucy or from her, I have no fear; but that other to whom is there that
she is Un-Dead, he have now the power to seek her tomb and find shelter.
He is cunning, as I know from Mr. Jonathan and from the way that all
along he have fooled us when he played with us for Miss Lucy's life, and
we lost; and in many ways the Un-Dead are strong. He have always the
strength in his hand of twenty men; even we four who gave our strength
to Miss Lucy it also is all to him. Besides, he can summon his wolf and
I know not what. So if it be that he come thither on this night he shall
find me; but none other shall--until it be too late. But it may be that
he will not attempt the place. There is no reason why he should; his
hunting ground is more full of game than the churchyard where the
Un-Dead woman sleep, and the one old man watch.

"Therefore I write this in case.... Take the papers that are with this,
the diaries of Harker and the rest, and read them, and then find this
great Un-Dead, and cut off his head and burn his heart or drive a stake
through it, so that the world may rest from him.

"If it be so, farewell.

"VAN HELSING."



_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_28 September._--It is wonderful what a good night's sleep will do for
one. Yesterday I was almost willing to accept Van Helsing's monstrous
ideas; but now they seem to start out lurid before me as outrages on
common sense. I have no doubt that he believes it all. I wonder if his
mind can have become in any way unhinged. Surely there must be _some_
rational explanation of all these mysterious things. Is it possible that
the Professor can have done it himself? He is so abnormally clever that
if he went off his head he would carry out his intent with regard to
some fixed idea in a wonderful way. I am loath to think it, and indeed
it would be almost as great a marvel as the other to find that Van
Helsing was mad; but anyhow I shall watch him carefully. I may get some
light on the mystery.

       *       *       *       *       *

_29 September, morning._.... Last night, at a little before ten o'clock,
Arthur and Quincey came into Van Helsing's room; he told us all that he
wanted us to do, but especially addressing himself to Arthur, as if all
our wills were centred in his. He began by saying that he hoped we would
all come with him too, "for," he said, "there is a grave duty to be done
there. You were doubtless surprised at my letter?" This query was
directly addressed to Lord Godalming.

"I was. It rather upset me for a bit. There has been so much trouble
around my house of late that I could do without any more. I have been
curious, too, as to what you mean. Quincey and I talked it over; but the
more we talked, the more puzzled we got, till now I can say for myself
that I'm about up a tree as to any meaning about anything."

"Me too," said Quincey Morris laconically.

"Oh," said the Professor, "then you are nearer the beginning, both of
you, than friend John here, who has to go a long way back before he can
even get so far as to begin."

It was evident that he recognised my return to my old doubting frame of
mind without my saying a word. Then, turning to the other two, he said
with intense gravity:--

"I want your permission to do what I think good this night. It is, I
know, much to ask; and when you know what it is I propose to do you will
know, and only then, how much. Therefore may I ask that you promise me
in the dark, so that afterwards, though you may be angry with me for a
time--I must not disguise from myself the possibility that such may
be--you shall not blame yourselves for anything."

"That's frank anyhow," broke in Quincey. "I'll answer for the Professor.
I don't quite see his drift, but I swear he's honest; and that's good
enough for me."

"I thank you, sir," said Van Helsing proudly. "I have done myself the
honour of counting you one trusting friend, and such endorsement is dear
to me." He held out a hand, which Quincey took.

Then Arthur spoke out:--

"Dr. Van Helsing, I don't quite like to 'buy a pig in a poke,' as they
say in Scotland, and if it be anything in which my honour as a gentleman
or my faith as a Christian is concerned, I cannot make such a promise.
If you can assure me that what you intend does not violate either of
these two, then I give my consent at once; though for the life of me, I
cannot understand what you are driving at."

"I accept your limitation," said Van Helsing, "and all I ask of you is
that if you feel it necessary to condemn any act of mine, you will first
consider it well and be satisfied that it does not violate your
reservations."

"Agreed!" said Arthur; "that is only fair. And now that the
_pourparlers_ are over, may I ask what it is we are to do?"

"I want you to come with me, and to come in secret, to the churchyard at
Kingstead."

Arthur's face fell as he said in an amazed sort of way:--

"Where poor Lucy is buried?" The Professor bowed. Arthur went on: "And
when there?"

"To enter the tomb!" Arthur stood up.

"Professor, are you in earnest; or it is some monstrous joke? Pardon me,
I see that you are in earnest." He sat down again, but I could see that
he sat firmly and proudly, as one who is on his dignity. There was
silence until he asked again:--

"And when in the tomb?"

"To open the coffin."

"This is too much!" he said, angrily rising again. "I am willing to be
patient in all things that are reasonable; but in this--this desecration
of the grave--of one who----" He fairly choked with indignation. The
Professor looked pityingly at him.

"If I could spare you one pang, my poor friend," he said, "God knows I
would. But this night our feet must tread in thorny paths; or later, and
for ever, the feet you love must walk in paths of flame!"

Arthur looked up with set white face and said:--

"Take care, sir, take care!"

"Would it not be well to hear what I have to say?" said Van Helsing.
"And then you will at least know the limit of my purpose. Shall I go
on?"

"That's fair enough," broke in Morris.

After a pause Van Helsing went on, evidently with an effort:--

"Miss Lucy is dead; is it not so? Yes! Then there can be no wrong to
her. But if she be not dead----"

Arthur jumped to his feet.

"Good God!" he cried. "What do you mean? Has there been any mistake; has
she been buried alive?" He groaned in anguish that not even hope could
soften.

"I did not say she was alive, my child; I did not think it. I go no
further than to say that she might be Un-Dead."

"Un-Dead! Not alive! What do you mean? Is this all a nightmare, or what
is it?"

"There are mysteries which men can only guess at, which age by age they
may solve only in part. Believe me, we are now on the verge of one. But
I have not done. May I cut off the head of dead Miss Lucy?"

"Heavens and earth, no!" cried Arthur in a storm of passion. "Not for
the wide world will I consent to any mutilation of her dead body. Dr.
Van Helsing, you try me too far. What have I done to you that you should
torture me so? What did that poor, sweet girl do that you should want to
cast such dishonour on her grave? Are you mad to speak such things, or
am I mad to listen to them? Don't dare to think more of such a
desecration; I shall not give my consent to anything you do. I have a
duty to do in protecting her grave from outrage; and, by God, I shall do
it!"

Van Helsing rose up from where he had all the time been seated, and
said, gravely and sternly:--

"My Lord Godalming, I, too, have a duty to do, a duty to others, a duty
to you, a duty to the dead; and, by God, I shall do it! All I ask you
now is that you come with me, that you look and listen; and if when
later I make the same request you do not be more eager for its
fulfilment even than I am, then--then I shall do my duty, whatever it
may seem to me. And then, to follow of your Lordship's wishes I shall
hold myself at your disposal to render an account to you, when and where
you will." His voice broke a little, and he went on with a voice full of
pity:--

"But, I beseech you, do not go forth in anger with me. In a long life of
acts which were often not pleasant to do, and which sometimes did wring
my heart, I have never had so heavy a task as now. Believe me that if
the time comes for you to change your mind towards me, one look from
you will wipe away all this so sad hour, for I would do what a man can
to save you from sorrow. Just think. For why should I give myself so
much of labour and so much of sorrow? I have come here from my own land
to do what I can of good; at the first to please my friend John, and
then to help a sweet young lady, whom, too, I came to love. For her--I
am ashamed to say so much, but I say it in kindness--I gave what you
gave; the blood of my veins; I gave it, I, who was not, like you, her
lover, but only her physician and her friend. I gave to her my nights
and days--before death, after death; and if my death can do her good
even now, when she is the dead Un-Dead, she shall have it freely." He
said this with a very grave, sweet pride, and Arthur was much affected
by it. He took the old man's hand and said in a broken voice:--

"Oh, it is hard to think of it, and I cannot understand; but at least I
shall go with you and wait."




CHAPTER XVI

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY--_continued_


It was just a quarter before twelve o'clock when we got into the
churchyard over the low wall. The night was dark with occasional gleams
of moonlight between the rents of the heavy clouds that scudded across
the sky. We all kept somehow close together, with Van Helsing slightly
in front as he led the way. When we had come close to the tomb I looked
well at Arthur, for I feared that the proximity to a place laden with so
sorrowful a memory would upset him; but he bore himself well. I took it
that the very mystery of the proceeding was in some way a counteractant
to his grief. The Professor unlocked the door, and seeing a natural
hesitation amongst us for various reasons, solved the difficulty by
entering first himself. The rest of us followed, and he closed the door.
He then lit a dark lantern and pointed to the coffin. Arthur stepped
forward hesitatingly; Van Helsing said to me:--

"You were with me here yesterday. Was the body of Miss Lucy in that
coffin?"

"It was." The Professor turned to the rest saying:--

"You hear; and yet there is no one who does not believe with me." He
took his screwdriver and again took off the lid of the coffin. Arthur
looked on, very pale but silent; when the lid was removed he stepped
forward. He evidently did not know that there was a leaden coffin, or,
at any rate, had not thought of it. When he saw the rent in the lead,
the blood rushed to his face for an instant, but as quickly fell away
again, so that he remained of a ghastly whiteness; he was still silent.
Van Helsing forced back the leaden flange, and we all looked in and
recoiled.

The coffin was empty!

For several minutes no one spoke a word. The silence was broken by
Quincey Morris:--

"Professor, I answered for you. Your word is all I want. I wouldn't ask
such a thing ordinarily--I wouldn't so dishonour you as to imply a
doubt; but this is a mystery that goes beyond any honour or dishonour.
Is this your doing?"

"I swear to you by all that I hold sacred that I have not removed nor
touched her. What happened was this: Two nights ago my friend Seward and
I came here--with good purpose, believe me. I opened that coffin, which
was then sealed up, and we found it, as now, empty. We then waited, and
saw something white come through the trees. The next day we came here in
day-time, and she lay there. Did she not, friend John?"

"Yes."

"That night we were just in time. One more so small child was missing,
and we find it, thank God, unharmed amongst the graves. Yesterday I came
here before sundown, for at sundown the Un-Dead can move. I waited here
all the night till the sun rose, but I saw nothing. It was most probable
that it was because I had laid over the clamps of those doors garlic,
which the Un-Dead cannot bear, and other things which they shun. Last
night there was no exodus, so to-night before the sundown I took away my
garlic and other things. And so it is we find this coffin empty. But
bear with me. So far there is much that is strange. Wait you with me
outside, unseen and unheard, and things much stranger are yet to be.
So"--here he shut the dark slide of his lantern--"now to the outside."
He opened the door, and we filed out, he coming last and locking the
door behind him.

Oh! but it seemed fresh and pure in the night air after the terror of
that vault. How sweet it was to see the clouds race by, and the passing
gleams of the moonlight between the scudding clouds crossing and
passing--like the gladness and sorrow of a man's life; how sweet it was
to breathe the fresh air, that had no taint of death and decay; how
humanising to see the red lighting of the sky beyond the hill, and to
hear far away the muffled roar that marks the life of a great city. Each
in his own way was solemn and overcome. Arthur was silent, and was, I
could see, striving to grasp the purpose and the inner meaning of the
mystery. I was myself tolerably patient, and half inclined again to
throw aside doubt and to accept Van Helsing's conclusions. Quincey
Morris was phlegmatic in the way of a man who accepts all things, and
accepts them in the spirit of cool bravery, with hazard of all he has to
stake. Not being able to smoke, he cut himself a good-sized plug of
tobacco and began to chew. As to Van Helsing, he was employed in a
definite way. First he took from his bag a mass of what looked like
thin, wafer-like biscuit, which was carefully rolled up in a white
napkin; next he took out a double-handful of some whitish stuff, like
dough or putty. He crumbled the wafer up fine and worked it into the
mass between his hands. This he then took, and rolling it into thin
strips, began to lay them into the crevices between the door and its
setting in the tomb. I was somewhat puzzled at this, and being close,
asked him what it was that he was doing. Arthur and Quincey drew near
also, as they too were curious. He answered:--

"I am closing the tomb, so that the Un-Dead may not enter."

"And is that stuff you have put there going to do it?" asked Quincey.
"Great Scott! Is this a game?"

"It is."

"What is that which you are using?" This time the question was by
Arthur. Van Helsing reverently lifted his hat as he answered:--

"The Host. I brought it from Amsterdam. I have an Indulgence." It was an
answer that appalled the most sceptical of us, and we felt individually
that in the presence of such earnest purpose as the Professor's, a
purpose which could thus use the to him most sacred of things, it was
impossible to distrust. In respectful silence we took the places
assigned to us close round the tomb, but hidden from the sight of any
one approaching. I pitied the others, especially Arthur. I had myself
been apprenticed by my former visits to this watching horror; and yet I,
who had up to an hour ago repudiated the proofs, felt my heart sink
within me. Never did tombs look so ghastly white; never did cypress, or
yew, or juniper so seem the embodiment of funereal gloom; never did tree
or grass wave or rustle so ominously; never did bough creak so
mysteriously; and never did the far-away howling of dogs send such a
woeful presage through the night.

There was a long spell of silence, a big, aching void, and then from the
Professor a keen "S-s-s-s!" He pointed; and far down the avenue of yews
we saw a white figure advance--a dim white figure, which held something
dark at its breast. The figure stopped, and at the moment a ray of
moonlight fell upon the masses of driving clouds and showed in startling
prominence a dark-haired woman, dressed in the cerements of the grave.
We could not see the face, for it was bent down over what we saw to be a
fair-haired child. There was a pause and a sharp little cry, such as a
child gives in sleep, or a dog as it lies before the fire and dreams. We
were starting forward, but the Professor's warning hand, seen by us as
he stood behind a yew-tree, kept us back; and then as we looked the
white figure moved forwards again. It was now near enough for us to see
clearly, and the moonlight still held. My own heart grew cold as ice,
and I could hear the gasp of Arthur, as we recognised the features of
Lucy Westenra. Lucy Westenra, but yet how changed. The sweetness was
turned to adamantine, heartless cruelty, and the purity to voluptuous
wantonness. Van Helsing stepped out, and, obedient to his gesture, we
all advanced too; the four of us ranged in a line before the door of the
tomb. Van Helsing raised his lantern and drew the slide; by the
concentrated light that fell on Lucy's face we could see that the lips
were crimson with fresh blood, and that the stream had trickled over her
chin and stained the purity of her lawn death-robe.

We shuddered with horror. I could see by the tremulous light that even
Van Helsing's iron nerve had failed. Arthur was next to me, and if I had
not seized his arm and held him up, he would have fallen.

When Lucy--I call the thing that was before us Lucy because it bore her
shape--saw us she drew back with an angry snarl, such as a cat gives
when taken unawares; then her eyes ranged over us. Lucy's eyes in form
and colour; but Lucy's eyes unclean and full of hell-fire, instead of
the pure, gentle orbs we knew. At that moment the remnant of my love
passed into hate and loathing; had she then to be killed, I could have
done it with savage delight. As she looked, her eyes blazed with unholy
light, and the face became wreathed with a voluptuous smile. Oh, God,
how it made me shudder to see it! With a careless motion, she flung to
the ground, callous as a devil, the child that up to now she had
clutched strenuously to her breast, growling over it as a dog growls
over a bone. The child gave a sharp cry, and lay there moaning. There
was a cold-bloodedness in the act which wrung a groan from Arthur; when
she advanced to him with outstretched arms and a wanton smile he fell
back and hid his face in his hands.

She still advanced, however, and with a languorous, voluptuous grace,
said:--

"Come to me, Arthur. Leave these others and come to me. My arms are
hungry for you. Come, and we can rest together. Come, my husband, come!"

There was something diabolically sweet in her tones--something of the
tingling of glass when struck--which rang through the brains even of us
who heard the words addressed to another. As for Arthur, he seemed under
a spell; moving his hands from his face, he opened wide his arms. She
was leaping for them, when Van Helsing sprang forward and held between
them his little golden crucifix. She recoiled from it, and, with a
suddenly distorted face, full of rage, dashed past him as if to enter
the tomb.

When within a foot or two of the door, however, she stopped, as if
arrested by some irresistible force. Then she turned, and her face was
shown in the clear burst of moonlight and by the lamp, which had now no
quiver from Van Helsing's iron nerves. Never did I see such baffled
malice on a face; and never, I trust, shall such ever be seen again by
mortal eyes. The beautiful colour became livid, the eyes seemed to throw
out sparks of hell-fire, the brows were wrinkled as though the folds of
the flesh were the coils of Medusa's snakes, and the lovely,
blood-stained mouth grew to an open square, as in the passion masks of
the Greeks and Japanese. If ever a face meant death--if looks could
kill--we saw it at that moment.

And so for full half a minute, which seemed an eternity, she remained
between the lifted crucifix and the sacred closing of her means of
entry. Van Helsing broke the silence by asking Arthur:--

"Answer me, oh my friend! Am I to proceed in my work?"

Arthur threw himself on his knees, and hid his face in his hands, as he
answered:--

"Do as you will, friend; do as you will. There can be no horror like
this ever any more;" and he groaned in spirit. Quincey and I
simultaneously moved towards him, and took his arms. We could hear the
click of the closing lantern as Van Helsing held it down; coming close
to the tomb, he began to remove from the chinks some of the sacred
emblem which he had placed there. We all looked on in horrified
amazement as we saw, when he stood back, the woman, with a corporeal
body as real at that moment as our own, pass in through the interstice
where scarce a knife-blade could have gone. We all felt a glad sense of
relief when we saw the Professor calmly restoring the strings of putty
to the edges of the door.

When this was done, he lifted the child and said:

"Come now, my friends; we can do no more till to-morrow. There is a
funeral at noon, so here we shall all come before long after that. The
friends of the dead will all be gone by two, and when the sexton lock
the gate we shall remain. Then there is more to do; but not like this of
to-night. As for this little one, he is not much harm, and by to-morrow
night he shall be well. We shall leave him where the police will find
him, as on the other night; and then to home." Coming close to Arthur,
he said:--

"My friend Arthur, you have had a sore trial; but after, when you look
back, you will see how it was necessary. You are now in the bitter
waters, my child. By this time to-morrow you will, please God, have
passed them, and have drunk of the sweet waters; so do not mourn
overmuch. Till then I shall not ask you to forgive me."

Arthur and Quincey came home with me, and we tried to cheer each other
on the way. We had left the child in safety, and were tired; so we all
slept with more or less reality of sleep.

       *       *       *       *       *

_29 September, night._--A little before twelve o'clock we three--Arthur,
Quincey Morris, and myself--called for the Professor. It was odd to
notice that by common consent we had all put on black clothes. Of
course, Arthur wore black, for he was in deep mourning, but the rest of
us wore it by instinct. We got to the churchyard by half-past one, and
strolled about, keeping out of official observation, so that when the
gravediggers had completed their task and the sexton under the belief
that every one had gone, had locked the gate, we had the place all to
ourselves. Van Helsing, instead of his little black bag, had with him a
long leather one, something like a cricketing bag; it was manifestly of
fair weight.

When we were alone and had heard the last of the footsteps die out up
the road, we silently, and as if by ordered intention, followed the
Professor to the tomb. He unlocked the door, and we entered, closing it
behind us. Then he took from his bag the lantern, which he lit, and also
two wax candles, which, when lighted, he stuck, by melting their own
ends, on other coffins, so that they might give light sufficient to work
by. When he again lifted the lid off Lucy's coffin we all looked--Arthur
trembling like an aspen--and saw that the body lay there in all its
death-beauty. But there was no love in my own heart, nothing but
loathing for the foul Thing which had taken Lucy's shape without her
soul. I could see even Arthur's face grow hard as he looked. Presently
he said to Van Helsing:--

"Is this really Lucy's body, or only a demon in her shape?"

"It is her body, and yet not it. But wait a while, and you all see her
as she was, and is."

She seemed like a nightmare of Lucy as she lay there; the pointed teeth,
the bloodstained, voluptuous mouth--which it made one shudder to
see--the whole carnal and unspiritual appearance, seeming like a
devilish mockery of Lucy's sweet purity. Van Helsing, with his usual
methodicalness, began taking the various contents from his bag and
placing them ready for use. First he took out a soldering iron and some
plumbing solder, and then a small oil-lamp, which gave out, when lit in
a corner of the tomb, gas which burned at fierce heat with a blue
flame; then his operating knives, which he placed to hand; and last a
round wooden stake, some two and a half or three inches thick and about
three feet long. One end of it was hardened by charring in the fire, and
was sharpened to a fine point. With this stake came a heavy hammer, such
as in households is used in the coal-cellar for breaking the lumps. To
me, a doctor's preparations for work of any kind are stimulating and
bracing, but the effect of these things on both Arthur and Quincey was
to cause them a sort of consternation. They both, however, kept their
courage, and remained silent and quiet.

When all was ready, Van Helsing said:--

"Before we do anything, let me tell you this; it is out of the lore and
experience of the ancients and of all those who have studied the powers
of the Un-Dead. When they become such, there comes with the change the
curse of immortality; they cannot die, but must go on age after age
adding new victims and multiplying the evils of the world; for all that
die from the preying of the Un-Dead becomes themselves Un-Dead, and prey
on their kind. And so the circle goes on ever widening, like as the
ripples from a stone thrown in the water. Friend Arthur, if you had met
that kiss which you know of before poor Lucy die; or again, last night
when you open your arms to her, you would in time, when you had died,
have become _nosferatu_, as they call it in Eastern Europe, and would
all time make more of those Un-Deads that so have fill us with horror.
The career of this so unhappy dear lady is but just begun. Those
children whose blood she suck are not as yet so much the worse; but if
she live on, Un-Dead, more and more they lose their blood and by her
power over them they come to her; and so she draw their blood with that
so wicked mouth. But if she die in truth, then all cease; the tiny
wounds of the throats disappear, and they go back to their plays
unknowing ever of what has been. But of the most blessed of all, when
this now Un-Dead be made to rest as true dead, then the soul of the poor
lady whom we love shall again be free. Instead of working wickedness by
night and growing more debased in the assimilating of it by day, she
shall take her place with the other Angels. So that, my friend, it will
be a blessed hand for her that shall strike the blow that sets her free.
To this I am willing; but is there none amongst us who has a better
right? Will it be no joy to think of hereafter in the silence of the
night when sleep is not: 'It was my hand that sent her to the stars; it
was the hand of him that loved her best; the hand that of all she would
herself have chosen, had it been to her to choose?' Tell me if there be
such a one amongst us?"

We all looked at Arthur. He saw, too, what we all did, the infinite
kindness which suggested that his should be the hand which would restore
Lucy to us as a holy, and not an unholy, memory; he stepped forward and
said bravely, though his hand trembled, and his face was as pale as
snow:--

"My true friend, from the bottom of my broken heart I thank you. Tell me
what I am to do, and I shall not falter!" Van Helsing laid a hand on his
shoulder, and said:--

"Brave lad! A moment's courage, and it is done. This stake must be
driven through her. It will be a fearful ordeal--be not deceived in
that--but it will be only a short time, and you will then rejoice more
than your pain was great; from this grim tomb you will emerge as though
you tread on air. But you must not falter when once you have begun. Only
think that we, your true friends, are round you, and that we pray for
you all the time."

"Go on," said Arthur hoarsely. "Tell me what I am to do."

"Take this stake in your left hand, ready to place the point over the
heart, and the hammer in your right. Then when we begin our prayer for
the dead--I shall read him, I have here the book, and the others shall
follow--strike in God's name, that so all may be well with the dead that
we love and that the Un-Dead pass away."

Arthur took the stake and the hammer, and when once his mind was set on
action his hands never trembled nor even quivered. Van Helsing opened
his missal and began to read, and Quincey and I followed as well as we
could. Arthur placed the point over the heart, and as I looked I could
see its dint in the white flesh. Then he struck with all his might.

The Thing in the coffin writhed; and a hideous, blood-curdling screech
came from the opened red lips. The body shook and quivered and twisted
in wild contortions; the sharp white teeth champed together till the
lips were cut, and the mouth was smeared with a crimson foam. But Arthur
never faltered. He looked like a figure of Thor as his untrembling arm
rose and fell, driving deeper and deeper the mercy-bearing stake, whilst
the blood from the pierced heart welled and spurted up around it. His
face was set, and high duty seemed to shine through it; the sight of it
gave us courage so that our voices seemed to ring through the little
vault.

And then the writhing and quivering of the body became less, and the
teeth seemed to champ, and the face to quiver. Finally it lay still. The
terrible task was over.

The hammer fell from Arthur's hand. He reeled and would have fallen had
we not caught him. The great drops of sweat sprang from his forehead,
and his breath came in broken gasps. It had indeed been an awful strain
on him; and had he not been forced to his task by more than human
considerations he could never have gone through with it. For a few
minutes we were so taken up with him that we did not look towards the
coffin. When we did, however, a murmur of startled surprise ran from one
to the other of us. We gazed so eagerly that Arthur rose, for he had
been seated on the ground, and came and looked too; and then a glad,
strange light broke over his face and dispelled altogether the gloom of
horror that lay upon it.

There, in the coffin lay no longer the foul Thing that we had so dreaded
and grown to hate that the work of her destruction was yielded as a
privilege to the one best entitled to it, but Lucy as we had seen her in
her life, with her face of unequalled sweetness and purity. True that
there were there, as we had seen them in life, the traces of care and
pain and waste; but these were all dear to us, for they marked her truth
to what we knew. One and all we felt that the holy calm that lay like
sunshine over the wasted face and form was only an earthly token and
symbol of the calm that was to reign for ever.

Van Helsing came and laid his hand on Arthur's shoulder, and said to
him:--

"And now, Arthur my friend, dear lad, am I not forgiven?"

The reaction of the terrible strain came as he took the old man's hand
in his, and raising it to his lips, pressed it, and said:--

"Forgiven! God bless you that you have given my dear one her soul again,
and me peace." He put his hands on the Professor's shoulder, and laying
his head on his breast, cried for a while silently, whilst we stood
unmoving. When he raised his head Van Helsing said to him:--

"And now, my child, you may kiss her. Kiss her dead lips if you will, as
she would have you to, if for her to choose. For she is not a grinning
devil now--not any more a foul Thing for all eternity. No longer she is
the devil's Un-Dead. She is God's true dead, whose soul is with Him!"

Arthur bent and kissed her, and then we sent him and Quincey out of the
tomb; the Professor and I sawed the top off the stake, leaving the point
of it in the body. Then we cut off the head and filled the mouth with
garlic. We soldered up the leaden coffin, screwed on the coffin-lid,
and gathering up our belongings, came away. When the Professor locked
the door he gave the key to Arthur.

Outside the air was sweet, the sun shone, and the birds sang, and it
seemed as if all nature were tuned to a different pitch. There was
gladness and mirth and peace everywhere, for we were at rest ourselves
on one account, and we were glad, though it was with a tempered joy.

Before we moved away Van Helsing said:--

"Now, my friends, one step of our work is done, one the most harrowing
to ourselves. But there remains a greater task: to find out the author
of all this our sorrow and to stamp him out. I have clues which we can
follow; but it is a long task, and a difficult, and there is danger in
it, and pain. Shall you not all help me? We have learned to believe, all
of us--is it not so? And since so, do we not see our duty? Yes! And do
we not promise to go on to the bitter end?"

Each in turn, we took his hand, and the promise was made. Then said the
Professor as we moved off:--

"Two nights hence you shall meet with me and dine together at seven of
the clock with friend John. I shall entreat two others, two that you
know not as yet; and I shall be ready to all our work show and our plans
unfold. Friend John, you come with me home, for I have much to consult
about, and you can help me. To-night I leave for Amsterdam, but shall
return to-morrow night. And then begins our great quest. But first I
shall have much to say, so that you may know what is to do and to dread.
Then our promise shall be made to each other anew; for there is a
terrible task before us, and once our feet are on the ploughshare we
must not draw back."




CHAPTER XVII

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY--_continued_


When we arrived at the Berkeley Hotel, Van Helsing found a telegram
waiting for him:--

     "Am coming up by train. Jonathan at Whitby. Important news.--MINA
     HARKER."

The Professor was delighted. "Ah, that wonderful Madam Mina," he said,
"pearl among women! She arrive, but I cannot stay. She must go to your
house, friend John. You must meet her at the station. Telegraph her _en
route_, so that she may be prepared."

When the wire was despatched he had a cup of tea; over it he told me of
a diary kept by Jonathan Harker when abroad, and gave me a typewritten
copy of it, as also of Mrs. Harker's diary at Whitby. "Take these," he
said, "and study them well. When I have returned you will be master of
all the facts, and we can then better enter on our inquisition. Keep
them safe, for there is in them much of treasure. You will need all your
faith, even you who have had such an experience as that of to-day. What
is here told," he laid his hand heavily and gravely on the packet of
papers as he spoke, "may be the beginning of the end to you and me and
many another; or it may sound the knell of the Un-Dead who walk the
earth. Read all, I pray you, with the open mind; and if you can add in
any way to the story here told do so, for it is all-important. You have
kept diary of all these so strange things; is it not so? Yes! Then we
shall go through all these together when we meet." He then made ready
for his departure, and shortly after drove off to Liverpool Street. I
took my way to Paddington, where I arrived about fifteen minutes before
the train came in.

The crowd melted away, after the bustling fashion common to arrival
platforms; and I was beginning to feel uneasy, lest I might miss my
guest, when a sweet-faced, dainty-looking girl stepped up to me, and,
after a quick glance, said: "Dr. Seward, is it not?"

"And you are Mrs. Harker!" I answered at once; whereupon she held out
her hand.

"I knew you from the description of poor dear Lucy; but----" She stopped
suddenly, and a quick blush overspread her face.

The blush that rose to my own cheeks somehow set us both at ease, for it
was a tacit answer to her own. I got her luggage, which included a
typewriter, and we took the Underground to Fenchurch Street, after I had
sent a wire to my housekeeper to have a sitting-room and bedroom
prepared at once for Mrs. Harker.

In due time we arrived. She knew, of course, that the place was a
lunatic asylum, but I could see that she was unable to repress a shudder
when we entered.

She told me that, if she might, she would come presently to my study, as
she had much to say. So here I am finishing my entry in my phonograph
diary whilst I await her. As yet I have not had the chance of looking at
the papers which Van Helsing left with me, though they lie open before
me. I must get her interested in something, so that I may have an
opportunity of reading them. She does not know how precious time is, or
what a task we have in hand. I must be careful not to frighten her. Here
she is!


_Mina Harker's Journal._

_29 September._--After I had tidied myself, I went down to Dr. Seward's
study. At the door I paused a moment, for I thought I heard him talking
with some one. As, however, he had pressed me to be quick, I knocked at
the door, and on his calling out, "Come in," I entered.

To my intense surprise, there was no one with him. He was quite alone,
and on the table opposite him was what I knew at once from the
description to be a phonograph. I had never seen one, and was much
interested.

"I hope I did not keep you waiting," I said; "but I stayed at the door
as I heard you talking, and thought there was some one with you."

"Oh," he replied with a smile, "I was only entering my diary."

"Your diary?" I asked him in surprise.

"Yes," he answered. "I keep it in this." As he spoke he laid his hand on
the phonograph. I felt quite excited over it, and blurted out:--

"Why, this beats even shorthand! May I hear it say something?"

"Certainly," he replied with alacrity, and stood up to put it in train
for speaking. Then he paused, and a troubled look overspread his face.

"The fact is," he began awkwardly, "I only keep my diary in it; and as
it is entirely--almost entirely--about my cases, it may be awkward--that
is, I mean----" He stopped, and I tried to help him out of his
embarrassment:--

"You helped to attend dear Lucy at the end. Let me hear how she died;
for all that I know of her, I shall be very grateful. She was very, very
dear to me."

To my surprise, he answered, with a horrorstruck look in his face:--

"Tell you of her death? Not for the wide world!"

"Why not?" I asked, for some grave, terrible feeling was coming over me.
Again he paused, and I could see that he was trying to invent an excuse.
At length he stammered out:--

"You see, I do not know how to pick out any particular part of the
diary." Even while he was speaking an idea dawned upon him, and he said
with unconscious simplicity, in a different voice, and with the naïveté
of a child: "That's quite true, upon my honour. Honest Indian!" I could
not but smile, at which he grimaced. "I gave myself away that time!" he
said. "But do you know that, although I have kept the diary for months
past, it never once struck me how I was going to find any particular
part of it in case I wanted to look it up?" By this time my mind was
made up that the diary of a doctor who attended Lucy might have
something to add to the sum of our knowledge of that terrible Being, and
I said boldly:--

"Then, Dr. Seward, you had better let me copy it out for you on my
typewriter." He grew to a positively deathly pallor as he said:--

"No! no! no! For all the world, I wouldn't let you know that terrible
story!"

Then it was terrible; my intuition was right! For a moment I thought,
and as my eyes ranged the room, unconsciously looking for something or
some opportunity to aid me, they lit on a great batch of typewriting on
the table. His eyes caught the look in mine, and, without his thinking,
followed their direction. As they saw the parcel he realised my meaning.

"You do not know me," I said. "When you have read those papers--my own
diary and my husband's also, which I have typed--you will know me
better. I have not faltered in giving every thought of my own heart in
this cause; but, of course, you do not know me--yet; and I must not
expect you to trust me so far."

He is certainly a man of noble nature; poor dear Lucy was right about
him. He stood up and opened a large drawer, in which were arranged in
order a number of hollow cylinders of metal covered with dark wax, and
said:--

"You are quite right. I did not trust you because I did not know you.
But I know you now; and let me say that I should have known you long
ago. I know that Lucy told you of me; she told me of you too. May I make
the only atonement in my power? Take the cylinders and hear them--the
first half-dozen of them are personal to me, and they will not horrify
you; then you will know me better. Dinner will by then be ready. In the
meantime I shall read over some of these documents, and shall be better
able to understand certain things." He carried the phonograph himself up
to my sitting-room and adjusted it for me. Now I shall learn something
pleasant, I am sure; for it will tell me the other side of a true love
episode of which I know one side already....


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_29 September._--I was so absorbed in that wonderful diary of Jonathan
Harker and that other of his wife that I let the time run on without
thinking. Mrs. Harker was not down when the maid came to announce
dinner, so I said: "She is possibly tired; let dinner wait an hour," and
I went on with my work. I had just finished Mrs. Harker's diary, when
she came in. She looked sweetly pretty, but very sad, and her eyes were
flushed with crying. This somehow moved me much. Of late I have had
cause for tears, God knows! but the relief of them was denied me; and
now the sight of those sweet eyes, brightened with recent tears, went
straight to my heart. So I said as gently as I could:--

"I greatly fear I have distressed you."

"Oh, no, not distressed me," she replied, "but I have been more touched
than I can say by your grief. That is a wonderful machine, but it is
cruelly true. It told me, in its very tones, the anguish of your heart.
It was like a soul crying out to Almighty God. No one must hear them
spoken ever again! See, I have tried to be useful. I have copied out the
words on my typewriter, and none other need now hear your heart beat, as
I did."

"No one need ever know, shall ever know," I said in a low voice. She
laid her hand on mine and said very gravely:--

"Ah, but they must!"

"Must! But why?" I asked.

"Because it is a part of the terrible story, a part of poor dear Lucy's
death and all that led to it; because in the struggle which we have
before us to rid the earth of this terrible monster we must have all
the knowledge and all the help which we can get. I think that the
cylinders which you gave me contained more than you intended me to know;
but I can see that there are in your record many lights to this dark
mystery. You will let me help, will you not? I know all up to a certain
point; and I see already, though your diary only took me to 7 September,
how poor Lucy was beset, and how her terrible doom was being wrought
out. Jonathan and I have been working day and night since Professor Van
Helsing saw us. He is gone to Whitby to get more information, and he
will be here to-morrow to help us. We need have no secrets amongst us;
working together and with absolute trust, we can surely be stronger than
if some of us were in the dark." She looked at me so appealingly, and at
the same time manifested such courage and resolution in her bearing,
that I gave in at once to her wishes. "You shall," I said, "do as you
like in the matter. God forgive me if I do wrong! There are terrible
things yet to learn of; but if you have so far travelled on the road to
poor Lucy's death, you will not be content, I know, to remain in the
dark. Nay, the end--the very end--may give you a gleam of peace. Come,
there is dinner. We must keep one another strong for what is before us;
we have a cruel and dreadful task. When you have eaten you shall learn
the rest, and I shall answer any questions you ask--if there be anything
which you do not understand, though it was apparent to us who were
present."


_Mina Harker's Journal._

_29 September._--After dinner I came with Dr. Seward to his study. He
brought back the phonograph from my room, and I took my typewriter. He
placed me in a comfortable chair, and arranged the phonograph so that I
could touch it without getting up, and showed me how to stop it in case
I should want to pause. Then he very thoughtfully took a chair, with his
back to me, so that I might be as free as possible, and began to read. I
put the forked metal to my ears and listened.

When the terrible story of Lucy's death, and--and all that followed, was
done, I lay back in my chair powerless. Fortunately I am not of a
fainting disposition. When Dr. Seward saw me he jumped up with a
horrified exclamation, and hurriedly taking a case-bottle from a
cupboard, gave me some brandy, which in a few minutes somewhat restored
me. My brain was all in a whirl, and only that there came through all
the multitude of horrors, the holy ray of light that my dear, dear Lucy
was at last at peace, I do not think I could have borne it without
making a scene. It is all so wild, and mysterious, and strange that if I
had not known Jonathan's experience in Transylvania I could not have
believed. As it was, I didn't know what to believe, and so got out of my
difficulty by attending to something else. I took the cover off my
typewriter, and said to Dr. Seward:--

"Let me write this all out now. We must be ready for Dr. Van Helsing
when he comes. I have sent a telegram to Jonathan to come on here when
he arrives in London from Whitby. In this matter dates are everything,
and I think that if we get all our material ready, and have every item
put in chronological order, we shall have done much. You tell me that
Lord Godalming and Mr. Morris are coming too. Let us be able to tell him
when they come." He accordingly set the phonograph at a slow pace, and I
began to typewrite from the beginning of the seventh cylinder. I used
manifold, and so took three copies of the diary, just as I had done with
all the rest. It was late when I got through, but Dr. Seward went about
his work of going his round of the patients; when he had finished he
came back and sat near me, reading, so that I did not feel too lonely
whilst I worked. How good and thoughtful he is; the world seems full of
good men--even if there _are_ monsters in it. Before I left him I
remembered what Jonathan put in his diary of the Professor's
perturbation at reading something in an evening paper at the station at
Exeter; so, seeing that Dr. Seward keeps his newspapers, I borrowed the
files of "The Westminster Gazette" and "The Pall Mall Gazette," and took
them to my room. I remember how much "The Dailygraph" and "The Whitby
Gazette," of which I had made cuttings, helped us to understand the
terrible events at Whitby when Count Dracula landed, so I shall look
through the evening papers since then, and perhaps I shall get some new
light. I am not sleepy, and the work will help to keep me quiet.


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_30 September._--Mr. Harker arrived at nine o'clock. He had got his
wife's wire just before starting. He is uncommonly clever, if one can
judge from his face, and full of energy. If this journal be true--and
judging by one's own wonderful experiences, it must be--he is also a man
of great nerve. That going down to the vault a second time was a
remarkable piece of daring. After reading his account of it I was
prepared to meet a good specimen of manhood, but hardly the quiet,
business-like gentleman who came here to-day.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--After lunch Harker and his wife went back to their own room,
and as I passed a while ago I heard the click of the typewriter. They
are hard at it. Mrs. Harker says that they are knitting together in
chronological order every scrap of evidence they have. Harker has got
the letters between the consignee of the boxes at Whitby and the
carriers in London who took charge of them. He is now reading his wife's
typescript of my diary. I wonder what they make out of it. Here it
is....

     Strange that it never struck me that the very next house might be
     the Count's hiding-place! Goodness knows that we had enough clues
     from the conduct of the patient Renfield! The bundle of letters
     relating to the purchase of the house were with the typescript. Oh,
     if we had only had them earlier we might have saved poor Lucy!
     Stop; that way madness lies! Harker has gone back, and is again
     collating his material. He says that by dinner-time they will be
     able to show a whole connected narrative. He thinks that in the
     meantime I should see Renfield, as hitherto he has been a sort of
     index to the coming and going of the Count. I hardly see this yet,
     but when I get at the dates I suppose I shall. What a good thing
     that Mrs. Harker put my cylinders into type! We never could have
     found the dates otherwise....

     I found Renfield sitting placidly in his room with his hands
     folded, smiling benignly. At the moment he seemed as sane as any
     one I ever saw. I sat down and talked with him on a lot of
     subjects, all of which he treated naturally. He then, of his own
     accord, spoke of going home, a subject he has never mentioned to my
     knowledge during his sojourn here. In fact, he spoke quite
     confidently of getting his discharge at once. I believe that, had I
     not had the chat with Harker and read the letters and the dates of
     his outbursts, I should have been prepared to sign for him after a
     brief time of observation. As it is, I am darkly suspicious. All
     those outbreaks were in some way linked with the proximity of the
     Count. What then does this absolute content mean? Can it be that
     his instinct is satisfied as to the vampire's ultimate triumph?
     Stay; he is himself zoöphagous, and in his wild ravings outside the
     chapel door of the deserted house he always spoke of "master." This
     all seems confirmation of our idea. However, after a while I came
     away; my friend is just a little too sane at present to make it
     safe to probe him too deep with questions. He might begin to think,
     and then--! So I came away. I mistrust these quiet moods of his; so
     I have given the attendant a hint to look closely after him, and to
     have a strait-waistcoat ready in case of need.


_Jonathan Harker's Journal._

_29 September, in train to London._--When I received Mr. Billington's
courteous message that he would give me any information in his power I
thought it best to go down to Whitby and make, on the spot, such
inquiries as I wanted. It was now my object to trace that horrid cargo
of the Count's to its place in London. Later, we may be able to deal
with it. Billington junior, a nice lad, met me at the station, and
brought me to his father's house, where they had decided that I must
stay the night. They are hospitable, with true Yorkshire hospitality:
give a guest everything, and leave him free to do as he likes. They all
knew that I was busy, and that my stay was short, and Mr. Billington had
ready in his office all the papers concerning the consignment of boxes.
It gave me almost a turn to see again one of the letters which I had
seen on the Count's table before I knew of his diabolical plans.
Everything had been carefully thought out, and done systematically and
with precision. He seemed to have been prepared for every obstacle which
might be placed by accident in the way of his intentions being carried
out. To use an Americanism, he had "taken no chances," and the absolute
accuracy with which his instructions were fulfilled, was simply the
logical result of his care. I saw the invoice, and took note of it:
"Fifty cases of common earth, to be used for experimental purposes."
Also the copy of letter to Carter Paterson, and their reply; of both of
these I got copies. This was all the information Mr. Billington could
give me, so I went down to the port and saw the coastguards, the Customs
officers and the harbour-master. They had all something to say of the
strange entry of the ship, which is already taking its place in local
tradition; but no one could add to the simple description "Fifty cases
of common earth." I then saw the station-master, who kindly put me in
communication with the men who had actually received the boxes. Their
tally was exact with the list, and they had nothing to add except that
the boxes were "main and mortal heavy," and that shifting them was dry
work. One of them added that it was hard lines that there wasn't any
gentleman "such-like as yourself, squire," to show some sort of
appreciation of their efforts in a liquid form; another put in a rider
that the thirst then generated was such that even the time which had
elapsed had not completely allayed it. Needless to add, I took care
before leaving to lift, for ever and adequately, this source of
reproach.

       *       *       *       *       *

_30 September._--The station-master was good enough to give me a line to
his old companion the station-master at King's Cross, so that when I
arrived there in the morning I was able to ask him about the arrival of
the boxes. He, too, put me at once in communication with the proper
officials, and I saw that their tally was correct with the original
invoice. The opportunities of acquiring an abnormal thirst had been here
limited; a noble use of them had, however, been made, and again I was
compelled to deal with the result in an _ex post facto_ manner.

From thence I went on to Carter Paterson's central office, where I met
with the utmost courtesy. They looked up the transaction in their
day-book and letter-book, and at once telephoned to their King's Cross
office for more details. By good fortune, the men who did the teaming
were waiting for work, and the official at once sent them over, sending
also by one of them the way-bill and all the papers connected with the
delivery of the boxes at Carfax. Here again I found the tally agreeing
exactly; the carriers' men were able to supplement the paucity of the
written words with a few details. These were, I shortly found, connected
almost solely with the dusty nature of the job, and of the consequent
thirst engendered in the operators. On my affording an opportunity,
through the medium of the currency of the realm, of the allaying, at a
later period, this beneficial evil, one of the men remarked:--

"That 'ere 'ouse, guv'nor, is the rummiest I ever was in. Blyme! but it
ain't been touched sence a hundred years. There was dust that thick in
the place that you might have slep' on it without 'urtin' of yer bones;
an' the place was that neglected that yer might 'ave smelled ole
Jerusalem in it. But the ole chapel--that took the cike, that did! Me
and my mate, we thort we wouldn't never git out quick enough. Lor', I
wouldn't take less nor a quid a moment to stay there arter dark."

Having been in the house, I could well believe him; but if he knew what
I know, he would, I think, have raised his terms.

Of one thing I am now satisfied: that _all_ the boxes which arrived at
Whitby from Varna in the _Demeter_ were safely deposited in the old
chapel at Carfax. There should be fifty of them there, unless any have
since been removed--as from Dr. Seward's diary I fear.

I shall try to see the carter who took away the boxes from Carfax when
Renfield attacked them. By following up this clue we may learn a good
deal.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Mina and I have worked all day, and we have put all the papers
into order.


_Mina Harker's Journal_

_30 September._--I am so glad that I hardly know how to contain myself.
It is, I suppose, the reaction from the haunting fear which I have had:
that this terrible affair and the reopening of his old wound might act
detrimentally on Jonathan. I saw him leave for Whitby with as brave a
face as I could, but I was sick with apprehension. The effort has,
however, done him good. He was never so resolute, never so strong, never
so full of volcanic energy, as at present. It is just as that dear, good
Professor Van Helsing said: he is true grit, and he improves under
strain that would kill a weaker nature. He came back full of life and
hope and determination; we have got everything in order for to-night. I
feel myself quite wild with excitement. I suppose one ought to pity any
thing so hunted as is the Count. That is just it: this Thing is not
human--not even beast. To read Dr. Seward's account of poor Lucy's
death, and what followed, is enough to dry up the springs of pity in
one's heart.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Lord Godalming and Mr. Morris arrived earlier than we
expected. Dr. Seward was out on business, and had taken Jonathan with
him, so I had to see them. It was to me a painful meeting, for it
brought back all poor dear Lucy's hopes of only a few months ago. Of
course they had heard Lucy speak of me, and it seemed that Dr. Van
Helsing, too, has been quite "blowing my trumpet," as Mr. Morris
expressed it. Poor fellows, neither of them is aware that I know all
about the proposals they made to Lucy. They did not quite know what to
say or do, as they were ignorant of the amount of my knowledge; so they
had to keep on neutral subjects. However, I thought the matter over, and
came to the conclusion that the best thing I could do would be to post
them in affairs right up to date. I knew from Dr. Seward's diary that
they had been at Lucy's death--her real death--and that I need not fear
to betray any secret before the time. So I told them, as well as I
could, that I had read all the papers and diaries, and that my husband
and I, having typewritten them, had just finished putting them in order.
I gave them each a copy to read in the library. When Lord Godalming got
his and turned it over--it does make a pretty good pile--he said:--

"Did you write all this, Mrs. Harker?"

I nodded, and he went on:--

"I don't quite see the drift of it; but you people are all so good and
kind, and have been working so earnestly and so energetically, that all
I can do is to accept your ideas blindfold and try to help you. I have
had one lesson already in accepting facts that should make a man humble
to the last hour of his life. Besides, I know you loved my poor Lucy--"
Here he turned away and covered his face with his hands. I could hear
the tears in his voice. Mr. Morris, with instinctive delicacy, just laid
a hand for a moment on his shoulder, and then walked quietly out of the
room. I suppose there is something in woman's nature that makes a man
free to break down before her and express his feelings on the tender or
emotional side without feeling it derogatory to his manhood; for when
Lord Godalming found himself alone with me he sat down on the sofa and
gave way utterly and openly. I sat down beside him and took his hand. I
hope he didn't think it forward of me, and that if he ever thinks of it
afterwards he never will have such a thought. There I wrong him; I
_know_ he never will--he is too true a gentleman. I said to him, for I
could see that his heart was breaking:--

"I loved dear Lucy, and I know what she was to you, and what you were to
her. She and I were like sisters; and now she is gone, will you not let
me be like a sister to you in your trouble? I know what sorrows you have
had, though I cannot measure the depth of them. If sympathy and pity can
help in your affliction, won't you let me be of some little service--for
Lucy's sake?"

In an instant the poor dear fellow was overwhelmed with grief. It seemed
to me that all that he had of late been suffering in silence found a
vent at once. He grew quite hysterical, and raising his open hands, beat
his palms together in a perfect agony of grief. He stood up and then sat
down again, and the tears rained down his cheeks. I felt an infinite
pity for him, and opened my arms unthinkingly. With a sob he laid his
head on my shoulder and cried like a wearied child, whilst he shook with
emotion.

We women have something of the mother in us that makes us rise above
smaller matters when the mother-spirit is invoked; I felt this big
sorrowing man's head resting on me, as though it were that of the baby
that some day may lie on my bosom, and I stroked his hair as though he
were my own child. I never thought at the time how strange it all was.

After a little bit his sobs ceased, and he raised himself with an
apology, though he made no disguise of his emotion. He told me that for
days and nights past--weary days and sleepless nights--he had been
unable to speak with any one, as a man must speak in his time of
sorrow. There was no woman whose sympathy could be given to him, or with
whom, owing to the terrible circumstance with which his sorrow was
surrounded, he could speak freely. "I know now how I suffered," he said,
as he dried his eyes, "but I do not know even yet--and none other can
ever know--how much your sweet sympathy has been to me to-day. I shall
know better in time; and believe me that, though I am not ungrateful
now, my gratitude will grow with my understanding. You will let me be
like a brother, will you not, for all our lives--for dear Lucy's sake?"

"For dear Lucy's sake," I said as we clasped hands. "Ay, and for your
own sake," he added, "for if a man's esteem and gratitude are ever worth
the winning, you have won mine to-day. If ever the future should bring
to you a time when you need a man's help, believe me, you will not call
in vain. God grant that no such time may ever come to you to break the
sunshine of your life; but if it should ever come, promise me that you
will let me know." He was so earnest, and his sorrow was so fresh, that
I felt it would comfort him, so I said:--

"I promise."

As I came along the corridor I saw Mr. Morris looking out of a window.
He turned as he heard my footsteps. "How is Art?" he said. Then noticing
my red eyes, he went on: "Ah, I see you have been comforting him. Poor
old fellow! he needs it. No one but a woman can help a man when he is in
trouble of the heart; and he had no one to comfort him."

He bore his own trouble so bravely that my heart bled for him. I saw the
manuscript in his hand, and I knew that when he read it he would realise
how much I knew; so I said to him:--

"I wish I could comfort all who suffer from the heart. Will you let me
be your friend, and will you come to me for comfort if you need it? You
will know, later on, why I speak." He saw that I was in earnest, and
stooping, took my hand, and raising it to his lips, kissed it. It seemed
but poor comfort to so brave and unselfish a soul, and impulsively I
bent over and kissed him. The tears rose in his eyes, and there was a
momentary choking in his throat; he said quite calmly:--

"Little girl, you will never regret that true-hearted kindness, so long
as ever you live!" Then he went into the study to his friend.

"Little girl!"--the very words he had used to Lucy, and oh, but he
proved himself a friend!




CHAPTER XVIII

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


_30 September._--I got home at five o'clock, and found that Godalming
and Morris had not only arrived, but had already studied the transcript
of the various diaries and letters which Harker and his wonderful wife
had made and arranged. Harker had not yet returned from his visit to the
carriers' men, of whom Dr. Hennessey had written to me. Mrs. Harker gave
us a cup of tea, and I can honestly say that, for the first time since I
have lived in it, this old house seemed like _home_. When we had
finished, Mrs. Harker said:--

"Dr. Seward, may I ask a favour? I want to see your patient, Mr.
Renfield. Do let me see him. What you have said of him in your diary
interests me so much!" She looked so appealing and so pretty that I
could not refuse her, and there was no possible reason why I should; so
I took her with me. When I went into the room, I told the man that a
lady would like to see him; to which he simply answered: "Why?"

"She is going through the house, and wants to see every one in it," I
answered. "Oh, very well," he said; "let her come in, by all means; but
just wait a minute till I tidy up the place." His method of tidying was
peculiar: he simply swallowed all the flies and spiders in the boxes
before I could stop him. It was quite evident that he feared, or was
jealous of, some interference. When he had got through his disgusting
task, he said cheerfully: "Let the lady come in," and sat down on the
edge of his bed with his head down, but with his eyelids raised so that
he could see her as she entered. For a moment I thought that he might
have some homicidal intent; I remembered how quiet he had been just
before he attacked me in my own study, and I took care to stand where I
could seize him at once if he attempted to make a spring at her. She
came into the room with an easy gracefulness which would at once command
the respect of any lunatic--for easiness is one of the qualities mad
people most respect. She walked over to him, smiling pleasantly, and
held out her hand.

"Good-evening, Mr. Renfield," said she. "You see, I know you, for Dr.
Seward has told me of you." He made no immediate reply, but eyed her all
over intently with a set frown on his face. This look gave way to one
of wonder, which merged in doubt; then, to my intense astonishment, he
said:--

"You're not the girl the doctor wanted to marry, are you? You can't be,
you know, for she's dead." Mrs. Harker smiled sweetly as she replied:--

"Oh no! I have a husband of my own, to whom I was married before I ever
saw Dr. Seward, or he me. I am Mrs. Harker."

"Then what are you doing here?"

"My husband and I are staying on a visit with Dr. Seward."

"Then don't stay."

"But why not?" I thought that this style of conversation might not be
pleasant to Mrs. Harker, any more than it was to me, so I joined in:--

"How did you know I wanted to marry any one?" His reply was simply
contemptuous, given in a pause in which he turned his eyes from Mrs.
Harker to me, instantly turning them back again:--

"What an asinine question!"

"I don't see that at all, Mr. Renfield," said Mrs. Harker, at once
championing me. He replied to her with as much courtesy and respect as
he had shown contempt to me:--

"You will, of course, understand, Mrs. Harker, that when a man is so
loved and honoured as our host is, everything regarding him is of
interest in our little community. Dr. Seward is loved not only by his
household and his friends, but even by his patients, who, being some of
them hardly in mental equilibrium, are apt to distort causes and
effects. Since I myself have been an inmate of a lunatic asylum, I
cannot but notice that the sophistic tendencies of some of its inmates
lean towards the errors of _non causa_ and _ignoratio elenchi_." I
positively opened my eyes at this new development. Here was my own pet
lunatic--the most pronounced of his type that I had ever met
with--talking elemental philosophy, and with the manner of a polished
gentleman. I wonder if it was Mrs. Harker's presence which had touched
some chord in his memory. If this new phase was spontaneous, or in any
way due to her unconscious influence, she must have some rare gift or
power.

We continued to talk for some time; and, seeing that he was seemingly
quite reasonable, she ventured, looking at me questioningly as she
began, to lead him to his favourite topic. I was again astonished, for
he addressed himself to the question with the impartiality of the
completest sanity; he even took himself as an example when he mentioned
certain things.

"Why, I myself am an instance of a man who had a strange belief. Indeed,
it was no wonder that my friends were alarmed, and insisted on my being
put under control. I used to fancy that life was a positive and
perpetual entity, and that by consuming a multitude of live things, no
matter how low in the scale of creation, one might indefinitely prolong
life. At times I held the belief so strongly that I actually tried to
take human life. The doctor here will bear me out that on one occasion I
tried to kill him for the purpose of strengthening my vital powers by
the assimilation with my own body of his life through the medium of his
blood--relying, of course, upon the Scriptural phrase, 'For the blood is
the life.' Though, indeed, the vendor of a certain nostrum has
vulgarised the truism to the very point of contempt. Isn't that true,
doctor?" I nodded assent, for I was so amazed that I hardly knew what to
either think or say; it was hard to imagine that I had seen him eat up
his spiders and flies not five minutes before. Looking at my watch, I
saw that I should go to the station to meet Van Helsing, so I told Mrs.
Harker that it was time to leave. She came at once, after saying
pleasantly to Mr. Renfield: "Good-bye, and I hope I may see you often,
under auspices pleasanter to yourself," to which, to my astonishment, he
replied:--

"Good-bye, my dear. I pray God I may never see your sweet face again.
May He bless and keep you!"

When I went to the station to meet Van Helsing I left the boys behind
me. Poor Art seemed more cheerful than he has been since Lucy first took
ill, and Quincey is more like his own bright self than he has been for
many a long day.

Van Helsing stepped from the carriage with the eager nimbleness of a
boy. He saw me at once, and rushed up to me, saying:--

"Ah, friend John, how goes all? Well? So! I have been busy, for I come
here to stay if need be. All affairs are settled with me, and I have
much to tell. Madam Mina is with you? Yes. And her so fine husband? And
Arthur and my friend Quincey, they are with you, too? Good!"

As I drove to the house I told him of what had passed, and of how my own
diary had come to be of some use through Mrs. Harker's suggestion; at
which the Professor interrupted me:--

"Ah, that wonderful Madam Mina! She has man's brain--a brain that a man
should have were he much gifted--and a woman's heart. The good God
fashioned her for a purpose, believe me, when He made that so good
combination. Friend John, up to now fortune has made that woman of help
to us; after to-night she must not have to do with this so terrible
affair. It is not good that she run a risk so great. We men are
determined--nay, are we not pledged?--to destroy this monster; but it is
no part for a woman. Even if she be not harmed, her heart may fail her
in so much and so many horrors; and hereafter she may suffer--both in
waking, from her nerves, and in sleep, from her dreams. And, besides,
she is young woman and not so long married; there may be other things to
think of some time, if not now. You tell me she has wrote all, then she
must consult with us; but to-morrow she say good-bye to this work, and
we go alone." I agreed heartily with him, and then I told him what we
had found in his absence: that the house which Dracula had bought was
the very next one to my own. He was amazed, and a great concern seemed
to come on him. "Oh that we had known it before!" he said, "for then we
might have reached him in time to save poor Lucy. However, 'the milk
that is spilt cries not out afterwards,' as you say. We shall not think
of that, but go on our way to the end." Then he fell into a silence that
lasted till we entered my own gateway. Before we went to prepare for
dinner he said to Mrs. Harker:--

"I am told, Madam Mina, by my friend John that you and your husband have
put up in exact order all things that have been, up to this moment."

"Not up to this moment, Professor," she said impulsively, "but up to
this morning."

"But why not up to now? We have seen hitherto how good light all the
little things have made. We have told our secrets, and yet no one who
has told is the worse for it."

Mrs. Harker began to blush, and taking a paper from her pockets, she
said:--

"Dr. Van Helsing, will you read this, and tell me if it must go in. It
is my record of to-day. I too have seen the need of putting down at
present everything, however trivial; but there is little in this except
what is personal. Must it go in?" The Professor read it over gravely,
and handed it back, saying:--

"It need not go in if you do not wish it; but I pray that it may. It can
but make your husband love you the more, and all us, your friends, more
honour you--as well as more esteem and love." She took it back with
another blush and a bright smile.

And so now, up to this very hour, all the records we have are complete
and in order. The Professor took away one copy to study after dinner,
and before our meeting, which is fixed for nine o'clock. The rest of us
have already read everything; so when we meet in the study we shall all
be informed as to facts, and can arrange our plan of battle with this
terrible and mysterious enemy.


_Mina Harker's Journal._

_30 September._--When we met in Dr. Seward's study two hours after
dinner, which had been at six o'clock, we unconsciously formed a sort of
board or committee. Professor Van Helsing took the head of the table, to
which Dr. Seward motioned him as he came into the room. He made me sit
next to him on his right, and asked me to act as secretary; Jonathan sat
next to me. Opposite us were Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward, and Mr.
Morris--Lord Godalming being next the Professor, and Dr. Seward in the
centre. The Professor said:--

"I may, I suppose, take it that we are all acquainted with the facts
that are in these papers." We all expressed assent, and he went on:--

"Then it were, I think good that I tell you something of the kind of
enemy with which we have to deal. I shall then make known to you
something of the history of this man, which has been ascertained for me.
So we then can discuss how we shall act, and can take our measure
according.

"There are such beings as vampires; some of us have evidence that they
exist. Even had we not the proof of our own unhappy experience, the
teachings and the records of the past give proof enough for sane
peoples. I admit that at the first I was sceptic. Were it not that
through long years I have train myself to keep an open mind, I could not
have believe until such time as that fact thunder on my ear. 'See! see!
I prove; I prove.' Alas! Had I known at the first what now I know--nay,
had I even guess at him--one so precious life had been spared to many of
us who did love her. But that is gone; and we must so work, that other
poor souls perish not, whilst we can save. The _nosferatu_ do not die
like the bee when he sting once. He is only stronger; and being
stronger, have yet more power to work evil. This vampire which is
amongst us is of himself so strong in person as twenty men; he is of
cunning more than mortal, for his cunning be the growth of ages; he have
still the aids of necromancy, which is, as his etymology imply, the
divination by the dead, and all the dead that he can come nigh to are
for him at command; he is brute, and more than brute; he is devil in
callous, and the heart of him is not; he can, within limitations, appear
at will when, and where, and in any of the forms that are to him; he
can, within his range, direct the elements; the storm, the fog, the
thunder; he can command all the meaner things: the rat, and the owl, and
the bat--the moth, and the fox, and the wolf; he can grow and become
small; and he can at times vanish and come unknown. How then are we to
begin our strike to destroy him? How shall we find his where; and having
found it, how can we destroy? My friends, this is much; it is a terrible
task that we undertake, and there may be consequence to make the brave
shudder. For if we fail in this our fight he must surely win; and then
where end we? Life is nothings; I heed him not. But to fail here, is not
mere life or death. It is that we become as him; that we henceforward
become foul things of the night like him--without heart or conscience,
preying on the bodies and the souls of those we love best. To us for
ever are the gates of heaven shut; for who shall open them to us again?
We go on for all time abhorred by all; a blot on the face of God's
sunshine; an arrow in the side of Him who died for man. But we are face
to face with duty; and in such case must we shrink? For me, I say, no;
but then I am old, and life, with his sunshine, his fair places, his
song of birds, his music and his love, lie far behind. You others are
young. Some have seen sorrow; but there are fair days yet in store. What
say you?"

Whilst he was speaking, Jonathan had taken my hand. I feared, oh so
much, that the appalling nature of our danger was overcoming him when I
saw his hand stretch out; but it was life to me to feel its touch--so
strong, so self-reliant, so resolute. A brave man's hand can speak for
itself; it does not even need a woman's love to hear its music.

When the Professor had done speaking my husband looked in my eyes, and I
in his; there was no need for speaking between us.

"I answer for Mina and myself," he said.

"Count me in, Professor," said Mr. Quincey Morris, laconically as usual.

"I am with you," said Lord Godalming, "for Lucy's sake, if for no other
reason."

Dr. Seward simply nodded. The Professor stood up and, after laying his
golden crucifix on the table, held out his hand on either side. I took
his right hand, and Lord Godalming his left; Jonathan held my right with
his left and stretched across to Mr. Morris. So as we all took hands our
solemn compact was made. I felt my heart icy cold, but it did not even
occur to me to draw back. We resumed our places, and Dr. Van Helsing
went on with a sort of cheerfulness which showed that the serious work
had begun. It was to be taken as gravely, and in as businesslike a way,
as any other transaction of life:--

"Well, you know what we have to contend against; but we, too, are not
without strength. We have on our side power of combination--a power
denied to the vampire kind; we have sources of science; we are free to
act and think; and the hours of the day and the night are ours equally.
In fact, so far as our powers extend, they are unfettered, and we are
free to use them. We have self-devotion in a cause, and an end to
achieve which is not a selfish one. These things are much.

"Now let us see how far the general powers arrayed against us are
restrict, and how the individual cannot. In fine, let us consider the
limitations of the vampire in general, and of this one in particular.

"All we have to go upon are traditions and superstitions. These do not
at the first appear much, when the matter is one of life and death--nay
of more than either life or death. Yet must we be satisfied; in the
first place because we have to be--no other means is at our control--and
secondly, because, after all, these things--tradition and
superstition--are everything. Does not the belief in vampires rest for
others--though not, alas! for us--on them? A year ago which of us would
have received such a possibility, in the midst of our scientific,
sceptical, matter-of-fact nineteenth century? We even scouted a belief
that we saw justified under our very eyes. Take it, then, that the
vampire, and the belief in his limitations and his cure, rest for the
moment on the same base. For, let me tell you, he is known everywhere
that men have been. In old Greece, in old Rome; he flourish in Germany
all over, in France, in India, even in the Chernosese; and in China, so
far from us in all ways, there even is he, and the peoples fear him at
this day. He have follow the wake of the berserker Icelander, the
devil-begotten Hun, the Slav, the Saxon, the Magyar. So far, then, we
have all we may act upon; and let me tell you that very much of the
beliefs are justified by what we have seen in our own so unhappy
experience. The vampire live on, and cannot die by mere passing of the
time; he can flourish when that he can fatten on the blood of the
living. Even more, we have seen amongst us that he can even grow
younger; that his vital faculties grow strenuous, and seem as though
they refresh themselves when his special pabulum is plenty. But he
cannot flourish without this diet; he eat not as others. Even friend
Jonathan, who lived with him for weeks, did never see him to eat, never!
He throws no shadow; he make in the mirror no reflect, as again
Jonathan observe. He has the strength of many of his hand--witness again
Jonathan when he shut the door against the wolfs, and when he help him
from the diligence too. He can transform himself to wolf, as we gather
from the ship arrival in Whitby, when he tear open the dog; he can be as
bat, as Madam Mina saw him on the window at Whitby, and as friend John
saw him fly from this so near house, and as my friend Quincey saw him at
the window of Miss Lucy. He can come in mist which he create--that noble
ship's captain proved him of this; but, from what we know, the distance
he can make this mist is limited, and it can only be round himself. He
come on moonlight rays as elemental dust--as again Jonathan saw those
sisters in the castle of Dracula. He become so small--we ourselves saw
Miss Lucy, ere she was at peace, slip through a hairbreadth space at the
tomb door. He can, when once he find his way, come out from anything or
into anything, no matter how close it be bound or even fused up with
fire--solder you call it. He can see in the dark--no small power this,
in a world which is one half shut from the light. Ah, but hear me
through. He can do all these things, yet he is not free. Nay; he is even
more prisoner than the slave of the galley, than the madman in his cell.
He cannot go where he lists; he who is not of nature has yet to obey
some of nature's laws--why we know not. He may not enter anywhere at the
first, unless there be some one of the household who bid him to come;
though afterwards he can come as he please. His power ceases, as does
that of all evil things, at the coming of the day. Only at certain times
can he have limited freedom. If he be not at the place whither he is
bound, he can only change himself at noon or at exact sunrise or sunset.
These things are we told, and in this record of ours we have proof by
inference. Thus, whereas he can do as he will within his limit, when he
have his earth-home, his coffin-home, his hell-home, the place
unhallowed, as we saw when he went to the grave of the suicide at
Whitby; still at other time he can only change when the time come. It is
said, too, that he can only pass running water at the slack or the flood
of the tide. Then there are things which so afflict him that he has no
power, as the garlic that we know of; and as for things sacred, as this
symbol, my crucifix, that was amongst us even now when we resolve, to
them he is nothing, but in their presence he take his place far off and
silent with respect. There are others, too, which I shall tell you of,
lest in our seeking we may need them. The branch of wild rose on his
coffin keep him that he move not from it; a sacred bullet fired into the
coffin kill him so that he be true dead; and as for the stake through
him, we know already of its peace; or the cut-off head that giveth rest.
We have seen it with our eyes.

"Thus when we find the habitation of this man-that-was, we can confine
him to his coffin and destroy him, if we obey what we know. But he is
clever. I have asked my friend Arminius, of Buda-Pesth University, to
make his record; and, from all the means that are, he tell me of what he
has been. He must, indeed, have been that Voivode Dracula who won his
name against the Turk, over the great river on the very frontier of
Turkey-land. If it be so, then was he no common man; for in that time,
and for centuries after, he was spoken of as the cleverest and the most
cunning, as well as the bravest of the sons of the 'land beyond the
forest.' That mighty brain and that iron resolution went with him to his
grave, and are even now arrayed against us. The Draculas were, says
Arminius, a great and noble race, though now and again were scions who
were held by their coevals to have had dealings with the Evil One. They
learned his secrets in the Scholomance, amongst the mountains over Lake
Hermanstadt, where the devil claims the tenth scholar as his due. In the
records are such words as 'stregoica'--witch, 'ordog,' and
'pokol'--Satan and hell; and in one manuscript this very Dracula is
spoken of as 'wampyr,' which we all understand too well. There have been
from the loins of this very one great men and good women, and their
graves make sacred the earth where alone this foulness can dwell. For it
is not the least of its terrors that this evil thing is rooted deep in
all good; in soil barren of holy memories it cannot rest."

Whilst they were talking Mr. Morris was looking steadily at the window,
and he now got up quietly, and went out of the room. There was a little
pause, and then the Professor went on:--

"And now we must settle what we do. We have here much data, and we must
proceed to lay out our campaign. We know from the inquiry of Jonathan
that from the castle to Whitby came fifty boxes of earth, all of which
were delivered at Carfax; we also know that at least some of these boxes
have been removed. It seems to me, that our first step should be to
ascertain whether all the rest remain in the house beyond that wall
where we look to-day; or whether any more have been removed. If the
latter, we must trace----"

Here we were interrupted in a very startling way. Outside the house came
the sound of a pistol-shot; the glass of the window was shattered with a
bullet, which, ricochetting from the top of the embrasure, struck the
far wall of the room. I am afraid I am at heart a coward, for I shrieked
out. The men all jumped to their feet; Lord Godalming flew over to the
window and threw up the sash. As he did so we heard Mr. Morris's voice
without:--

"Sorry! I fear I have alarmed you. I shall come in and tell you about
it." A minute later he came in and said:--

"It was an idiotic thing of me to do, and I ask your pardon, Mrs.
Harker, most sincerely; I fear I must have frightened you terribly. But
the fact is that whilst the Professor was talking there came a big bat
and sat on the window-sill. I have got such a horror of the damned
brutes from recent events that I cannot stand them, and I went out to
have a shot, as I have been doing of late of evenings, whenever I have
seen one. You used to laugh at me for it then, Art."

"Did you hit it?" asked Dr. Van Helsing.

"I don't know; I fancy not, for it flew away into the wood." Without
saying any more he took his seat, and the Professor began to resume his
statement:--

"We must trace each of these boxes; and when we are ready, we must
either capture or kill this monster in his lair; or we must, so to
speak, sterilise the earth, so that no more he can seek safety in it.
Thus in the end we may find him in his form of man between the hours of
noon and sunset, and so engage with him when he is at his most weak.

"And now for you, Madam Mina, this night is the end until all be well.
You are too precious to us to have such risk. When we part to-night, you
no more must question. We shall tell you all in good time. We are men
and are able to bear; but you must be our star and our hope, and we
shall act all the more free that you are not in the danger, such as we
are."

All the men, even Jonathan, seemed relieved; but it did not seem to me
good that they should brave danger and, perhaps, lessen their
safety--strength being the best safety--through care of me; but their
minds were made up, and, though it was a bitter pill for me to swallow,
I could say nothing, save to accept their chivalrous care of me.

Mr. Morris resumed the discussion:--

"As there is no time to lose, I vote we have a look at his house right
now. Time is everything with him; and swift action on our part may save
another victim."

I own that my heart began to fail me when the time for action came so
close, but I did not say anything, for I had a greater fear that if I
appeared as a drag or a hindrance to their work, they might even leave
me out of their counsels altogether. They have now gone off to Carfax,
with means to get into the house.

Manlike, they had told me to go to bed and sleep; as if a woman can
sleep when those she loves are in danger! I shall lie down and pretend
to sleep, lest Jonathan have added anxiety about me when he returns.


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_1 October, 4 a. m._--Just as we were about to leave the house, an
urgent message was brought to me from Renfield to know if I would see
him at once, as he had something of the utmost importance to say to me.
I told the messenger to say that I would attend to his wishes in the
morning; I was busy just at the moment. The attendant added:--

"He seems very importunate, sir. I have never seen him so eager. I don't
know but what, if you don't see him soon, he will have one of his
violent fits." I knew the man would not have said this without some
cause, so I said: "All right; I'll go now"; and I asked the others to
wait a few minutes for me, as I had to go and see my "patient."

"Take me with you, friend John," said the Professor. "His case in your
diary interest me much, and it had bearing, too, now and again on _our_
case. I should much like to see him, and especial when his mind is
disturbed."

"May I come also?" asked Lord Godalming.

"Me too?" said Quincey Morris. "May I come?" said Harker. I nodded, and
we all went down the passage together.

We found him in a state of considerable excitement, but far more
rational in his speech and manner than I had ever seen him. There was an
unusual understanding of himself, which was unlike anything I had ever
met with in a lunatic; and he took it for granted that his reasons would
prevail with others entirely sane. We all four went into the room, but
none of the others at first said anything. His request was that I would
at once release him from the asylum and send him home. This he backed up
with arguments regarding his complete recovery, and adduced his own
existing sanity. "I appeal to your friends," he said, "they will,
perhaps, not mind sitting in judgment on my case. By the way, you have
not introduced me." I was so much astonished, that the oddness of
introducing a madman in an asylum did not strike me at the moment; and,
besides, there was a certain dignity in the man's manner, so much of
the habit of equality, that I at once made the introduction: "Lord
Godalming; Professor Van Helsing; Mr. Quincey Morris, of Texas; Mr.
Renfield." He shook hands with each of them, saying in turn:--

"Lord Godalming, I had the honour of seconding your father at the
Windham; I grieve to know, by your holding the title, that he is no
more. He was a man loved and honoured by all who knew him; and in his
youth was, I have heard, the inventor of a burnt rum punch, much
patronised on Derby night. Mr. Morris, you should be proud of your great
state. Its reception into the Union was a precedent which may have
far-reaching effects hereafter, when the Pole and the Tropics may hold
alliance to the Stars and Stripes. The power of Treaty may yet prove a
vast engine of enlargement, when the Monroe doctrine takes its true
place as a political fable. What shall any man say of his pleasure at
meeting Van Helsing? Sir, I make no apology for dropping all forms of
conventional prefix. When an individual has revolutionised therapeutics
by his discovery of the continuous evolution of brain-matter,
conventional forms are unfitting, since they would seem to limit him to
one of a class. You, gentlemen, who by nationality, by heredity, or by
the possession of natural gifts, are fitted to hold your respective
places in the moving world, I take to witness that I am as sane as at
least the majority of men who are in full possession of their liberties.
And I am sure that you, Dr. Seward, humanitarian and medico-jurist as
well as scientist, will deem it a moral duty to deal with me as one to
be considered as under exceptional circumstances." He made this last
appeal with a courtly air of conviction which was not without its own
charm.

I think we were all staggered. For my own part, I was under the
conviction, despite my knowledge of the man's character and history,
that his reason had been restored; and I felt under a strong impulse to
tell him that I was satisfied as to his sanity, and would see about the
necessary formalities for his release in the morning. I thought it
better to wait, however, before making so grave a statement, for of old
I knew the sudden changes to which this particular patient was liable.
So I contented myself with making a general statement that he appeared
to be improving very rapidly; that I would have a longer chat with him
in the morning, and would then see what I could do in the direction of
meeting his wishes. This did not at all satisfy him, for he said
quickly:--

"But I fear, Dr. Seward, that you hardly apprehend my wish. I desire to
go at once--here--now--this very hour--this very moment, if I may. Time
presses, and in our implied agreement with the old scytheman it is of
the essence of the contract. I am sure it is only necessary to put
before so admirable a practitioner as Dr. Seward so simple, yet so
momentous a wish, to ensure its fulfilment." He looked at me keenly, and
seeing the negative in my face, turned to the others, and scrutinised
them closely. Not meeting any sufficient response, he went on:--

"Is it possible that I have erred in my supposition?"

"You have," I said frankly, but at the same time, as I felt, brutally.
There was a considerable pause, and then he said slowly:--

"Then I suppose I must only shift my ground of request. Let me ask for
this concession--boon, privilege, what you will. I am content to implore
in such a case, not on personal grounds, but for the sake of others. I
am not at liberty to give you the whole of my reasons; but you may, I
assure you, take it from me that they are good ones, sound and
unselfish, and spring from the highest sense of duty. Could you look,
sir, into my heart, you would approve to the full the sentiments which
animate me. Nay, more, you would count me amongst the best and truest of
your friends." Again he looked at us all keenly. I had a growing
conviction that this sudden change of his entire intellectual method was
but yet another form or phase of his madness, and so determined to let
him go on a little longer, knowing from experience that he would, like
all lunatics, give himself away in the end. Van Helsing was gazing at
him with a look of utmost intensity, his bushy eyebrows almost meeting
with the fixed concentration of his look. He said to Renfield in a tone
which did not surprise me at the time, but only when I thought of it
afterwards--for it was as of one addressing an equal:--

"Can you not tell frankly your real reason for wishing to be free
to-night? I will undertake that if you will satisfy even me--a stranger,
without prejudice, and with the habit of keeping an open mind--Dr.
Seward will give you, at his own risk and on his own responsibility, the
privilege you seek." He shook his head sadly, and with a look of
poignant regret on his face. The Professor went on:--

"Come, sir, bethink yourself. You claim the privilege of reason in the
highest degree, since you seek to impress us with your complete
reasonableness. You do this, whose sanity we have reason to doubt, since
you are not yet released from medical treatment for this very defect. If
you will not help us in our effort to choose the wisest course, how can
we perform the duty which you yourself put upon us? Be wise, and help
us; and if we can we shall aid you to achieve your wish." He still shook
his head as he said:--

"Dr. Van Helsing, I have nothing to say. Your argument is complete, and
if I were free to speak I should not hesitate a moment; but I am not my
own master in the matter. I can only ask you to trust me. If I am
refused, the responsibility does not rest with me." I thought it was now
time to end the scene, which was becoming too comically grave, so I went
towards the door, simply saying:--

"Come, my friends, we have work to do. Good-night."

As, however, I got near the door, a new change came over the patient. He
moved towards me so quickly that for the moment I feared that he was
about to make another homicidal attack. My fears, however, were
groundless, for he held up his two hands imploringly, and made his
petition in a moving manner. As he saw that the very excess of his
emotion was militating against him, by restoring us more to our old
relations, he became still more demonstrative. I glanced at Van Helsing,
and saw my conviction reflected in his eyes; so I became a little more
fixed in my manner, if not more stern, and motioned to him that his
efforts were unavailing. I had previously seen something of the same
constantly growing excitement in him when he had to make some request of
which at the time he had thought much, such, for instance, as when he
wanted a cat; and I was prepared to see the collapse into the same
sullen acquiescence on this occasion. My expectation was not realised,
for, when he found that his appeal would not be successful, he got into
quite a frantic condition. He threw himself on his knees, and held up
his hands, wringing them in plaintive supplication, and poured forth a
torrent of entreaty, with the tears rolling down his cheeks, and his
whole face and form expressive of the deepest emotion:--

"Let me entreat you, Dr. Seward, oh, let me implore you, to let me out
of this house at once. Send me away how you will and where you will;
send keepers with me with whips and chains; let them take me in a
strait-waistcoat, manacled and leg-ironed, even to a gaol; but let me go
out of this. You don't know what you do by keeping me here. I am
speaking from the depths of my heart--of my very soul. You don't know
whom you wrong, or how; and I may not tell. Woe is me! I may not tell.
By all you hold sacred--by all you hold dear--by your love that is
lost--by your hope that lives--for the sake of the Almighty, take me out
of this and save my soul from guilt! Can't you hear me, man? Can't you
understand? Will you never learn? Don't you know that I am sane and
earnest now; that I am no lunatic in a mad fit, but a sane man fighting
for his soul? Oh, hear me! hear me! Let me go! let me go! let me go!"

I thought that the longer this went on the wilder he would get, and so
would bring on a fit; so I took him by the hand and raised him up.

"Come," I said sternly, "no more of this; we have had quite enough
already. Get to your bed and try to behave more discreetly."

He suddenly stopped and looked at me intently for several moments. Then,
without a word, he rose and moving over, sat down on the side of the
bed. The collapse had come, as on former occasion, just as I had
expected.

When I was leaving the room, last of our party, he said to me in a
quiet, well-bred voice:--

"You will, I trust, Dr. Seward, do me the justice to bear in mind, later
on, that I did what I could to convince you to-night."




CHAPTER XIX

JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL


_1 October, 5 a. m._--I went with the party to the search with an easy
mind, for I think I never saw Mina so absolutely strong and well. I am
so glad that she consented to hold back and let us men do the work.
Somehow, it was a dread to me that she was in this fearful business at
all; but now that her work is done, and that it is due to her energy and
brains and foresight that the whole story is put together in such a way
that every point tells, she may well feel that her part is finished, and
that she can henceforth leave the rest to us. We were, I think, all a
little upset by the scene with Mr. Renfield. When we came away from his
room we were silent till we got back to the study. Then Mr. Morris said
to Dr. Seward:--

"Say, Jack, if that man wasn't attempting a bluff, he is about the
sanest lunatic I ever saw. I'm not sure, but I believe that he had some
serious purpose, and if he had, it was pretty rough on him not to get a
chance." Lord Godalming and I were silent, but Dr. Van Helsing added:--

"Friend John, you know more of lunatics than I do, and I'm glad of it,
for I fear that if it had been to me to decide I would before that last
hysterical outburst have given him free. But we live and learn, and in
our present task we must take no chance, as my friend Quincey would say.
All is best as they are." Dr. Seward seemed to answer them both in a
dreamy kind of way:--

"I don't know but that I agree with you. If that man had been an
ordinary lunatic I would have taken my chance of trusting him; but he
seems so mixed up with the Count in an indexy kind of way that I am
afraid of doing anything wrong by helping his fads. I can't forget how
he prayed with almost equal fervour for a cat, and then tried to tear my
throat out with his teeth. Besides, he called the Count 'lord and
master,' and he may want to get out to help him in some diabolical way.
That horrid thing has the wolves and the rats and his own kind to help
him, so I suppose he isn't above trying to use a respectable lunatic. He
certainly did seem earnest, though. I only hope we have done what is
best. These things, in conjunction with the wild work we have in hand,
help to unnerve a man." The Professor stepped over, and laying his hand
on his shoulder, said in his grave, kindly way:--

"Friend John, have no fear. We are trying to do our duty in a very sad
and terrible case; we can only do as we deem best. What else have we to
hope for, except the pity of the good God?" Lord Godalming had slipped
away for a few minutes, but now he returned. He held up a little silver
whistle, as he remarked:--

"That old place may be full of rats, and if so, I've got an antidote on
call." Having passed the wall, we took our way to the house, taking care
to keep in the shadows of the trees on the lawn when the moonlight shone
out. When we got to the porch the Professor opened his bag and took out
a lot of things, which he laid on the step, sorting them into four
little groups, evidently one for each. Then he spoke:--

"My friends, we are going into a terrible danger, and we need arms of
many kinds. Our enemy is not merely spiritual. Remember that he has the
strength of twenty men, and that, though our necks or our windpipes are
of the common kind--and therefore breakable or crushable--his are not
amenable to mere strength. A stronger man, or a body of men more strong
in all than him, can at certain times hold him; but they cannot hurt him
as we can be hurt by him. We must, therefore, guard ourselves from his
touch. Keep this near your heart"--as he spoke he lifted a little silver
crucifix and held it out to me, I being nearest to him--"put these
flowers round your neck"--here he handed to me a wreath of withered
garlic blossoms--"for other enemies more mundane, this revolver and this
knife; and for aid in all, these so small electric lamps, which you can
fasten to your breast; and for all, and above all at the last, this,
which we must not desecrate needless." This was a portion of Sacred
Wafer, which he put in an envelope and handed to me. Each of the others
was similarly equipped. "Now," he said, "friend John, where are the
skeleton keys? If so that we can open the door, we need not break house
by the window, as before at Miss Lucy's."

Dr. Seward tried one or two skeleton keys, his mechanical dexterity as a
surgeon standing him in good stead. Presently he got one to suit; after
a little play back and forward the bolt yielded, and, with a rusty
clang, shot back. We pressed on the door, the rusty hinges creaked, and
it slowly opened. It was startlingly like the image conveyed to me in
Dr. Seward's diary of the opening of Miss Westenra's tomb; I fancy that
the same idea seemed to strike the others, for with one accord they
shrank back. The Professor was the first to move forward, and stepped
into the open door.

"_In manus tuas, Domine!_" he said, crossing himself as he passed over
the threshold. We closed the door behind us, lest when we should have
lit our lamps we should possibly attract attention from the road. The
Professor carefully tried the lock, lest we might not be able to open it
from within should we be in a hurry making our exit. Then we all lit our
lamps and proceeded on our search.

The light from the tiny lamps fell in all sorts of odd forms, as the
rays crossed each other, or the opacity of our bodies threw great
shadows. I could not for my life get away from the feeling that there
was some one else amongst us. I suppose it was the recollection, so
powerfully brought home to me by the grim surroundings, of that terrible
experience in Transylvania. I think the feeling was common to us all,
for I noticed that the others kept looking over their shoulders at every
sound and every new shadow, just as I felt myself doing.

The whole place was thick with dust. The floor was seemingly inches
deep, except where there were recent footsteps, in which on holding down
my lamp I could see marks of hobnails where the dust was cracked. The
walls were fluffy and heavy with dust, and in the corners were masses of
spider's webs, whereon the dust had gathered till they looked like old
tattered rags as the weight had torn them partly down. On a table in the
hall was a great bunch of keys, with a time-yellowed label on each. They
had been used several times, for on the table were several similar rents
in the blanket of dust, similar to that exposed when the Professor
lifted them. He turned to me and said:--

"You know this place, Jonathan. You have copied maps of it, and you know
it at least more than we do. Which is the way to the chapel?" I had an
idea of its direction, though on my former visit I had not been able to
get admission to it; so I led the way, and after a few wrong turnings
found myself opposite a low, arched oaken door, ribbed with iron bands.
"This is the spot," said the Professor as he turned his lamp on a small
map of the house, copied from the file of my original correspondence
regarding the purchase. With a little trouble we found the key on the
bunch and opened the door. We were prepared for some unpleasantness, for
as we were opening the door a faint, malodorous air seemed to exhale
through the gaps, but none of us ever expected such an odour as we
encountered. None of the others had met the Count at all at close
quarters, and when I had seen him he was either in the fasting stage of
his existence in his rooms or, when he was gloated with fresh blood, in
a ruined building open to the air; but here the place was small and
close, and the long disuse had made the air stagnant and foul. There was
an earthy smell, as of some dry miasma, which came through the fouler
air. But as to the odour itself, how shall I describe it? It was not
alone that it was composed of all the ills of mortality and with the
pungent, acrid smell of blood, but it seemed as though corruption had
become itself corrupt. Faugh! it sickens me to think of it. Every breath
exhaled by that monster seemed to have clung to the place and
intensified its loathsomeness.

Under ordinary circumstances such a stench would have brought our
enterprise to an end; but this was no ordinary case, and the high and
terrible purpose in which we were involved gave us a strength which rose
above merely physical considerations. After the involuntary shrinking
consequent on the first nauseous whiff, we one and all set about our
work as though that loathsome place were a garden of roses.

We made an accurate examination of the place, the Professor saying as we
began:--

"The first thing is to see how many of the boxes are left; we must then
examine every hole and corner and cranny and see if we cannot get some
clue as to what has become of the rest." A glance was sufficient to show
how many remained, for the great earth chests were bulky, and there was
no mistaking them.

There were only twenty-nine left out of the fifty! Once I got a fright,
for, seeing Lord Godalming suddenly turn and look out of the vaulted
door into the dark passage beyond, I looked too, and for an instant my
heart stood still. Somewhere, looking out from the shadow, I seemed to
see the high lights of the Count's evil face, the ridge of the nose, the
red eyes, the red lips, the awful pallor. It was only for a moment, for,
as Lord Godalming said, "I thought I saw a face, but it was only the
shadows," and resumed his inquiry, I turned my lamp in the direction,
and stepped into the passage. There was no sign of any one; and as there
were no corners, no doors, no aperture of any kind, but only the solid
walls of the passage, there could be no hiding-place even for _him_. I
took it that fear had helped imagination, and said nothing.

A few minutes later I saw Morris step suddenly back from a corner, which
he was examining. We all followed his movements with our eyes, for
undoubtedly some nervousness was growing on us, and we saw a whole mass
of phosphorescence, which twinkled like stars. We all instinctively drew
back. The whole place was becoming alive with rats.

For a moment or two we stood appalled, all save Lord Godalming, who was
seemingly prepared for such an emergency. Rushing over to the great
iron-bound oaken door, which Dr. Seward had described from the outside,
and which I had seen myself, he turned the key in the lock, drew the
huge bolts, and swung the door open. Then, taking his little silver
whistle from his pocket, he blew a low, shrill call. It was answered
from behind Dr. Seward's house by the yelping of dogs, and after about a
minute three terriers came dashing round the corner of the house.
Unconsciously we had all moved towards the door, and as we moved I
noticed that the dust had been much disturbed: the boxes which had been
taken out had been brought this way. But even in the minute that had
elapsed the number of the rats had vastly increased. They seemed to
swarm over the place all at once, till the lamplight, shining on their
moving dark bodies and glittering, baleful eyes, made the place look
like a bank of earth set with fireflies. The dogs dashed on, but at the
threshold suddenly stopped and snarled, and then, simultaneously lifting
their noses, began to howl in most lugubrious fashion. The rats were
multiplying in thousands, and we moved out.

Lord Godalming lifted one of the dogs, and carrying him in, placed him
on the floor. The instant his feet touched the ground he seemed to
recover his courage, and rushed at his natural enemies. They fled before
him so fast that before he had shaken the life out of a score, the other
dogs, who had by now been lifted in the same manner, had but small prey
ere the whole mass had vanished.

With their going it seemed as if some evil presence had departed, for
the dogs frisked about and barked merrily as they made sudden darts at
their prostrate foes, and turned them over and over and tossed them in
the air with vicious shakes. We all seemed to find our spirits rise.
Whether it was the purifying of the deadly atmosphere by the opening of
the chapel door, or the relief which we experienced by finding ourselves
in the open I know not; but most certainly the shadow of dread seemed to
slip from us like a robe, and the occasion of our coming lost something
of its grim significance, though we did not slacken a whit in our
resolution. We closed the outer door and barred and locked it, and
bringing the dogs with us, began our search of the house. We found
nothing throughout except dust in extraordinary proportions, and all
untouched save for my own footsteps when I had made my first visit.
Never once did the dogs exhibit any symptom of uneasiness, and even when
we returned to the chapel they frisked about as though they had been
rabbit-hunting in a summer wood.

The morning was quickening in the east when we emerged from the front.
Dr. Van Helsing had taken the key of the hall-door from the bunch, and
locked the door in orthodox fashion, putting the key into his pocket
when he had done.

"So far," he said, "our night has been eminently successful. No harm has
come to us such as I feared might be and yet we have ascertained how
many boxes are missing. More than all do I rejoice that this, our
first--and perhaps our most difficult and dangerous--step has been
accomplished without the bringing thereinto our most sweet Madam Mina or
troubling her waking or sleeping thoughts with sights and sounds and
smells of horror which she might never forget. One lesson, too, we have
learned, if it be allowable to argue _a particulari_: that the brute
beasts which are to the Count's command are yet themselves not amenable
to his spiritual power; for look, these rats that would come to his
call, just as from his castle top he summon the wolves to your going and
to that poor mother's cry, though they come to him, they run pell-mell
from the so little dogs of my friend Arthur. We have other matters
before us, other dangers, other fears; and that monster--he has not used
his power over the brute world for the only or the last time to-night.
So be it that he has gone elsewhere. Good! It has given us opportunity
to cry 'check' in some ways in this chess game, which we play for the
stake of human souls. And now let us go home. The dawn is close at hand,
and we have reason to be content with our first night's work. It may be
ordained that we have many nights and days to follow, if full of peril;
but we must go on, and from no danger shall we shrink."

The house was silent when we got back, save for some poor creature who
was screaming away in one of the distant wards, and a low, moaning sound
from Renfield's room. The poor wretch was doubtless torturing himself,
after the manner of the insane, with needless thoughts of pain.

I came tiptoe into our own room, and found Mina asleep, breathing so
softly that I had to put my ear down to hear it. She looks paler than
usual. I hope the meeting to-night has not upset her. I am truly
thankful that she is to be left out of our future work, and even of our
deliberations. It is too great a strain for a woman to bear. I did not
think so at first, but I know better now. Therefore I am glad that it is
settled. There may be things which would frighten her to hear; and yet
to conceal them from her might be worse than to tell her if once she
suspected that there was any concealment. Henceforth our work is to be a
sealed book to her, till at least such time as we can tell her that all
is finished, and the earth free from a monster of the nether world. I
daresay it will be difficult to begin to keep silence after such
confidence as ours; but I must be resolute, and to-morrow I shall keep
dark over to-night's doings, and shall refuse to speak of anything that
has happened. I rest on the sofa, so as not to disturb her.

       *       *       *       *       *

_1 October, later._--I suppose it was natural that we should have all
overslept ourselves, for the day was a busy one, and the night had no
rest at all. Even Mina must have felt its exhaustion, for though I slept
till the sun was high, I was awake before her, and had to call two or
three times before she awoke. Indeed, she was so sound asleep that for a
few seconds she did not recognize me, but looked at me with a sort of
blank terror, as one looks who has been waked out of a bad dream. She
complained a little of being tired, and I let her rest till later in the
day. We now know of twenty-one boxes having been removed, and if it be
that several were taken in any of these removals we may be able to trace
them all. Such will, of course, immensely simplify our labour, and the
sooner the matter is attended to the better. I shall look up Thomas
Snelling to-day.


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_1 October._--It was towards noon when I was awakened by the Professor
walking into my room. He was more jolly and cheerful than usual, and it
is quite evident that last night's work has helped to take some of the
brooding weight off his mind. After going over the adventure of the
night he suddenly said:--

"Your patient interests me much. May it be that with you I visit him
this morning? Or if that you are too occupy, I can go alone if it may
be. It is a new experience to me to find a lunatic who talk philosophy,
and reason so sound." I had some work to do which pressed, so I told him
that if he would go alone I would be glad, as then I should not have to
keep him waiting; so I called an attendant and gave him the necessary
instructions. Before the Professor left the room I cautioned him against
getting any false impression from my patient. "But," he answered, "I
want him to talk of himself and of his delusion as to consuming live
things. He said to Madam Mina, as I see in your diary of yesterday, that
he had once had such a belief. Why do you smile, friend John?"

"Excuse me," I said, "but the answer is here." I laid my hand on the
type-written matter. "When our sane and learned lunatic made that very
statement of how he _used_ to consume life, his mouth was actually
nauseous with the flies and spiders which he had eaten just before Mrs.
Harker entered the room." Van Helsing smiled in turn. "Good!" he said.
"Your memory is true, friend John. I should have remembered. And yet it
is this very obliquity of thought and memory which makes mental disease
such a fascinating study. Perhaps I may gain more knowledge out of the
folly of this madman than I shall from the teaching of the most wise.
Who knows?" I went on with my work, and before long was through that in
hand. It seemed that the time had been very short indeed, but there was
Van Helsing back in the study. "Do I interrupt?" he asked politely as he
stood at the door.

"Not at all," I answered. "Come in. My work is finished, and I am free.
I can go with you now, if you like.

"It is needless; I have seen him!"

"Well?"

"I fear that he does not appraise me at much. Our interview was short.
When I entered his room he was sitting on a stool in the centre, with
his elbows on his knees, and his face was the picture of sullen
discontent. I spoke to him as cheerfully as I could, and with such a
measure of respect as I could assume. He made no reply whatever. "Don't
you know me?" I asked. His answer was not reassuring: "I know you well
enough; you are the old fool Van Helsing. I wish you would take yourself
and your idiotic brain theories somewhere else. Damn all thick-headed
Dutchmen!" Not a word more would he say, but sat in his implacable
sullenness as indifferent to me as though I had not been in the room at
all. Thus departed for this time my chance of much learning from this so
clever lunatic; so I shall go, if I may, and cheer myself with a few
happy words with that sweet soul Madam Mina. Friend John, it does
rejoice me unspeakable that she is no more to be pained, no more to be
worried with our terrible things. Though we shall much miss her help, it
is better so."

"I agree with you with all my heart," I answered earnestly, for I did
not want him to weaken in this matter. "Mrs. Harker is better out of it.
Things are quite bad enough for us, all men of the world, and who have
been in many tight places in our time; but it is no place for a woman,
and if she had remained in touch with the affair, it would in time
infallibly have wrecked her."

So Van Helsing has gone to confer with Mrs. Harker and Harker; Quincey
and Art are all out following up the clues as to the earth-boxes. I
shall finish my round of work and we shall meet to-night.


_Mina Harker's Journal._

_1 October._--It is strange to me to be kept in the dark as I am to-day;
after Jonathan's full confidence for so many years, to see him
manifestly avoid certain matters, and those the most vital of all. This
morning I slept late after the fatigues of yesterday, and though
Jonathan was late too, he was the earlier. He spoke to me before he went
out, never more sweetly or tenderly, but he never mentioned a word of
what had happened in the visit to the Count's house. And yet he must
have known how terribly anxious I was. Poor dear fellow! I suppose it
must have distressed him even more than it did me. They all agreed that
it was best that I should not be drawn further into this awful work, and
I acquiesced. But to think that he keeps anything from me! And now I am
crying like a silly fool, when I _know_ it comes from my husband's great
love and from the good, good wishes of those other strong men.

That has done me good. Well, some day Jonathan will tell me all; and
lest it should ever be that he should think for a moment that I kept
anything from him, I still keep my journal as usual. Then if he has
feared of my trust I shall show it to him, with every thought of my
heart put down for his dear eyes to read. I feel strangely sad and
low-spirited to-day. I suppose it is the reaction from the terrible
excitement.

Last night I went to bed when the men had gone, simply because they told
me to. I didn't feel sleepy, and I did feel full of devouring anxiety. I
kept thinking over everything that has been ever since Jonathan came to
see me in London, and it all seems like a horrible tragedy, with fate
pressing on relentlessly to some destined end. Everything that one does
seems, no matter how right it may be, to bring on the very thing which
is most to be deplored. If I hadn't gone to Whitby, perhaps poor dear
Lucy would be with us now. She hadn't taken to visiting the churchyard
till I came, and if she hadn't come there in the day-time with me she
wouldn't have walked there in her sleep; and if she hadn't gone there at
night and asleep, that monster couldn't have destroyed her as he did.
Oh, why did I ever go to Whitby? There now, crying again! I wonder what
has come over me to-day. I must hide it from Jonathan, for if he knew
that I had been crying twice in one morning--I, who never cried on my
own account, and whom he has never caused to shed a tear--the dear
fellow would fret his heart out. I shall put a bold face on, and if I do
feel weepy, he shall never see it. I suppose it is one of the lessons
that we poor women have to learn....

I can't quite remember how I fell asleep last night. I remember hearing
the sudden barking of the dogs and a lot of queer sounds, like praying
on a very tumultuous scale, from Mr. Renfield's room, which is somewhere
under this. And then there was silence over everything, silence so
profound that it startled me, and I got up and looked out of the window.
All was dark and silent, the black shadows thrown by the moonlight
seeming full of a silent mystery of their own. Not a thing seemed to be
stirring, but all to be grim and fixed as death or fate; so that a thin
streak of white mist, that crept with almost imperceptible slowness
across the grass towards the house, seemed to have a sentience and a
vitality of its own. I think that the digression of my thoughts must
have done me good, for when I got back to bed I found a lethargy
creeping over me. I lay a while, but could not quite sleep, so I got out
and looked out of the window again. The mist was spreading, and was now
close up to the house, so that I could see it lying thick against the
wall, as though it were stealing up to the windows. The poor man was
more loud than ever, and though I could not distinguish a word he said,
I could in some way recognise in his tones some passionate entreaty on
his part. Then there was the sound of a struggle, and I knew that the
attendants were dealing with him. I was so frightened that I crept into
bed, and pulled the clothes over my head, putting my fingers in my ears.
I was not then a bit sleepy, at least so I thought; but I must have
fallen asleep, for, except dreams, I do not remember anything until the
morning, when Jonathan woke me. I think that it took me an effort and a
little time to realise where I was, and that it was Jonathan who was
bending over me. My dream was very peculiar, and was almost typical of
the way that waking thoughts become merged in, or continued in, dreams.

I thought that I was asleep, and waiting for Jonathan to come back. I
was very anxious about him, and I was powerless to act; my feet, and my
hands, and my brain were weighted, so that nothing could proceed at the
usual pace. And so I slept uneasily and thought. Then it began to dawn
upon me that the air was heavy, and dank, and cold. I put back the
clothes from my face, and found, to my surprise, that all was dim
around. The gaslight which I had left lit for Jonathan, but turned down,
came only like a tiny red spark through the fog, which had evidently
grown thicker and poured into the room. Then it occurred to me that I
had shut the window before I had come to bed. I would have got out to
make certain on the point, but some leaden lethargy seemed to chain my
limbs and even my will. I lay still and endured; that was all. I closed
my eyes, but could still see through my eyelids. (It is wonderful what
tricks our dreams play us, and how conveniently we can imagine.) The
mist grew thicker and thicker and I could see now how it came in, for I
could see it like smoke--or with the white energy of boiling
water--pouring in, not through the window, but through the joinings of
the door. It got thicker and thicker, till it seemed as if it became
concentrated into a sort of pillar of cloud in the room, through the top
of which I could see the light of the gas shining like a red eye. Things
began to whirl through my brain just as the cloudy column was now
whirling in the room, and through it all came the scriptural words "a
pillar of cloud by day and of fire by night." Was it indeed some such
spiritual guidance that was coming to me in my sleep? But the pillar was
composed of both the day and the night-guiding, for the fire was in the
red eye, which at the thought got a new fascination for me; till, as I
looked, the fire divided, and seemed to shine on me through the fog like
two red eyes, such as Lucy told me of in her momentary mental wandering
when, on the cliff, the dying sunlight struck the windows of St. Mary's
Church. Suddenly the horror burst upon me that it was thus that Jonathan
had seen those awful women growing into reality through the whirling mist
in the moonlight, and in my dream I must have fainted, for all became
black darkness. The last conscious effort which imagination made was to
show me a livid white face bending over me out of the mist. I must be
careful of such dreams, for they would unseat one's reason if there were
too much of them. I would get Dr. Van Helsing or Dr. Seward to prescribe
something for me which would make me sleep, only that I fear to alarm
them. Such a dream at the present time would become woven into their
fears for me. To-night I shall strive hard to sleep naturally. If I do
not, I shall to-morrow night get them to give me a dose of chloral; that
cannot hurt me for once, and it will give me a good night's sleep. Last
night tired me more than if I had not slept at all.

       *       *       *       *       *

_2 October 10 p. m._--Last night I slept, but did not dream. I must have
slept soundly, for I was not waked by Jonathan coming to bed; but the
sleep has not refreshed me, for to-day I feel terribly weak and
spiritless. I spent all yesterday trying to read, or lying down dozing.
In the afternoon Mr. Renfield asked if he might see me. Poor man, he was
very gentle, and when I came away he kissed my hand and bade God bless
me. Some way it affected me much; I am crying when I think of him. This
is a new weakness, of which I must be careful. Jonathan would be
miserable if he knew I had been crying. He and the others were out till
dinner-time, and they all came in tired. I did what I could to brighten
them up, and I suppose that the effort did me good, for I forgot how
tired I was. After dinner they sent me to bed, and all went off to smoke
together, as they said, but I knew that they wanted to tell each other
of what had occurred to each during the day; I could see from Jonathan's
manner that he had something important to communicate. I was not so
sleepy as I should have been; so before they went I asked Dr. Seward to
give me a little opiate of some kind, as I had not slept well the night
before. He very kindly made me up a sleeping draught, which he gave to
me, telling me that it would do me no harm, as it was very mild.... I
have taken it, and am waiting for sleep, which still keeps aloof. I hope
I have not done wrong, for as sleep begins to flirt with me, a new fear
comes: that I may have been foolish in thus depriving myself of the
power of waking. I might want it. Here comes sleep. Good-night.




CHAPTER XX

JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL


_1 October, evening._--I found Thomas Snelling in his house at Bethnal
Green, but unhappily he was not in a condition to remember anything. The
very prospect of beer which my expected coming had opened to him had
proved too much, and he had begun too early on his expected debauch. I
learned, however, from his wife, who seemed a decent, poor soul, that he
was only the assistant to Smollet, who of the two mates was the
responsible person. So off I drove to Walworth, and found Mr. Joseph
Smollet at home and in his shirtsleeves, taking a late tea out of a
saucer. He is a decent, intelligent fellow, distinctly a good, reliable
type of workman, and with a headpiece of his own. He remembered all
about the incident of the boxes, and from a wonderful dog's-eared
notebook, which he produced from some mysterious receptacle about the
seat of his trousers, and which had hieroglyphical entries in thick,
half-obliterated pencil, he gave me the destinations of the boxes. There
were, he said, six in the cartload which he took from Carfax and left at
197, Chicksand Street, Mile End New Town, and another six which he
deposited at Jamaica Lane, Bermondsey. If then the Count meant to
scatter these ghastly refuges of his over London, these places were
chosen as the first of delivery, so that later he might distribute more
fully. The systematic manner in which this was done made me think that
he could not mean to confine himself to two sides of London. He was now
fixed on the far east of the northern shore, on the east of the southern
shore, and on the south. The north and west were surely never meant to
be left out of his diabolical scheme--let alone the City itself and the
very heart of fashionable London in the south-west and west. I went back
to Smollet, and asked him if he could tell us if any other boxes had
been taken from Carfax.

He replied:--

"Well, guv'nor, you've treated me wery 'an'some"--I had given him half a
sovereign--"an' I'll tell yer all I know. I heard a man by the name of
Bloxam say four nights ago in the 'Are an' 'Ounds, in Pincher's Alley,
as 'ow he an' his mate 'ad 'ad a rare dusty job in a old 'ouse at
Purfect. There ain't a-many such jobs as this 'ere, an' I'm thinkin'
that maybe Sam Bloxam could tell ye summut." I asked if he could tell me
where to find him. I told him that if he could get me the address it
would be worth another half-sovereign to him. So he gulped down the rest
of his tea and stood up, saying that he was going to begin the search
then and there. At the door he stopped, and said:--

"Look 'ere, guv'nor, there ain't no sense in me a-keepin' you 'ere. I
may find Sam soon, or I mayn't; but anyhow he ain't like to be in a way
to tell ye much to-night. Sam is a rare one when he starts on the booze.
If you can give me a envelope with a stamp on it, and put yer address on
it, I'll find out where Sam is to be found and post it ye to-night. But
ye'd better be up arter 'im soon in the mornin', or maybe ye won't ketch
'im; for Sam gets off main early, never mind the booze the night afore."

This was all practical, so one of the children went off with a penny to
buy an envelope and a sheet of paper, and to keep the change. When she
came back, I addressed the envelope and stamped it, and when Smollet had
again faithfully promised to post the address when found, I took my way
to home. We're on the track anyhow. I am tired to-night, and want sleep.
Mina is fast asleep, and looks a little too pale; her eyes look as
though she had been crying. Poor dear, I've no doubt it frets her to be
kept in the dark, and it may make her doubly anxious about me and the
others. But it is best as it is. It is better to be disappointed and
worried in such a way now than to have her nerve broken. The doctors
were quite right to insist on her being kept out of this dreadful
business. I must be firm, for on me this particular burden of silence
must rest. I shall not ever enter on the subject with her under any
circumstances. Indeed, it may not be a hard task, after all, for she
herself has become reticent on the subject, and has not spoken of the
Count or his doings ever since we told her of our decision.

       *       *       *       *       *

_2 October, evening._--A long and trying and exciting day. By the first
post I got my directed envelope with a dirty scrap of paper enclosed, on
which was written with a carpenter's pencil in a sprawling hand:--

"Sam Bloxam, Korkrans, 4, Poters Cort, Bartel Street, Walworth. Arsk for
the depite."

I got the letter in bed, and rose without waking Mina. She looked heavy
and sleepy and pale, and far from well. I determined not to wake her,
but that, when I should return from this new search, I would arrange for
her going back to Exeter. I think she would be happier in our own home,
with her daily tasks to interest her, than in being here amongst us and
in ignorance. I only saw Dr. Seward for a moment, and told him where I
was off to, promising to come back and tell the rest so soon as I should
have found out anything. I drove to Walworth and found, with some
difficulty, Potter's Court. Mr. Smollet's spelling misled me, as I asked
for Poter's Court instead of Potter's Court. However, when I had found
the court, I had no difficulty in discovering Corcoran's lodging-house.
When I asked the man who came to the door for the "depite," he shook his
head, and said: "I dunno 'im. There ain't no such a person 'ere; I never
'eard of 'im in all my bloomin' days. Don't believe there ain't nobody
of that kind livin' ere or anywheres." I took out Smollet's letter, and
as I read it it seemed to me that the lesson of the spelling of the name
of the court might guide me. "What are you?" I asked.

"I'm the depity," he answered. I saw at once that I was on the right
track; phonetic spelling had again misled me. A half-crown tip put the
deputy's knowledge at my disposal, and I learned that Mr. Bloxam, who
had slept off the remains of his beer on the previous night at
Corcoran's, had left for his work at Poplar at five o'clock that
morning. He could not tell me where the place of work was situated, but
he had a vague idea that it was some kind of a "new-fangled ware'us";
and with this slender clue I had to start for Poplar. It was twelve
o'clock before I got any satisfactory hint of such a building, and this
I got at a coffee-shop, where some workmen were having their dinner. One
of these suggested that there was being erected at Cross Angel Street a
new "cold storage" building; and as this suited the condition of a
"new-fangled ware'us," I at once drove to it. An interview with a surly
gatekeeper and a surlier foreman, both of whom were appeased with the
coin of the realm, put me on the track of Bloxam; he was sent for on my
suggesting that I was willing to pay his day's wages to his foreman for
the privilege of asking him a few questions on a private matter. He was
a smart enough fellow, though rough of speech and bearing. When I had
promised to pay for his information and given him an earnest, he told me
that he had made two journeys between Carfax and a house in Piccadilly,
and had taken from this house to the latter nine great boxes--"main
heavy ones"--with a horse and cart hired by him for this purpose. I
asked him if he could tell me the number of the house in Piccadilly, to
which he replied:--

"Well, guv'nor, I forgits the number, but it was only a few doors from a
big white church or somethink of the kind, not long built. It was a
dusty old 'ouse, too, though nothin' to the dustiness of the 'ouse we
tooked the bloomin' boxes from."

"How did you get into the houses if they were both empty?"

"There was the old party what engaged me a-waitin' in the 'ouse at
Purfleet. He 'elped me to lift the boxes and put them in the dray. Curse
me, but he was the strongest chap I ever struck, an' him a old feller,
with a white moustache, one that thin you would think he couldn't throw
a shadder."

How this phrase thrilled through me!

"Why, 'e took up 'is end o' the boxes like they was pounds of tea, and
me a-puffin' an' a-blowin' afore I could up-end mine anyhow--an' I'm no
chicken, neither."

"How did you get into the house in Piccadilly?" I asked.

"He was there too. He must 'a' started off and got there afore me, for
when I rung of the bell he kem an' opened the door 'isself an' 'elped me
to carry the boxes into the 'all."

"The whole nine?" I asked.

"Yus; there was five in the first load an' four in the second. It was
main dry work, an' I don't so well remember 'ow I got 'ome." I
interrupted him:--

"Were the boxes left in the hall?"

"Yus; it was a big 'all, an' there was nothin' else in it." I made one
more attempt to further matters:--

"You didn't have any key?"

"Never used no key nor nothink. The old gent, he opened the door 'isself
an' shut it again when I druv off. I don't remember the last time--but
that was the beer."

"And you can't remember the number of the house?"

"No, sir. But ye needn't have no difficulty about that. It's a 'igh 'un
with a stone front with a bow on it, an' 'igh steps up to the door. I
know them steps, 'avin' 'ad to carry the boxes up with three loafers
what come round to earn a copper. The old gent give them shillin's, an'
they seein' they got so much, they wanted more; but 'e took one of them
by the shoulder and was like to throw 'im down the steps, till the lot
of them went away cussin'." I thought that with this description I could
find the house, so, having paid my friend for his information, I started
off for Piccadilly. I had gained a new painful experience; the Count
could, it was evident, handle the earth-boxes himself. If so, time was
precious; for, now that he had achieved a certain amount of
distribution, he could, by choosing his own time, complete the task
unobserved. At Piccadilly Circus I discharged my cab, and walked
westward; beyond the Junior Constitutional I came across the house
described, and was satisfied that this was the next of the lairs
arranged by Dracula. The house looked as though it had been long
untenanted. The windows were encrusted with dust, and the shutters were
up. All the framework was black with time, and from the iron the paint
had mostly scaled away. It was evident that up to lately there had been
a large notice-board in front of the balcony; it had, however, been
roughly torn away, the uprights which had supported it still remaining.
Behind the rails of the balcony I saw there were some loose boards,
whose raw edges looked white. I would have given a good deal to have
been able to see the notice-board intact, as it would, perhaps, have
given some clue to the ownership of the house. I remembered my
experience of the investigation and purchase of Carfax, and I could not
but feel that if I could find the former owner there might be some means
discovered of gaining access to the house.

There was at present nothing to be learned from the Piccadilly side, and
nothing could be done; so I went round to the back to see if anything
could be gathered from this quarter. The mews were active, the
Piccadilly houses being mostly in occupation. I asked one or two of the
grooms and helpers whom I saw around if they could tell me anything
about the empty house. One of them said that he heard it had lately been
taken, but he couldn't say from whom. He told me, however, that up to
very lately there had been a notice-board of "For Sale" up, and that
perhaps Mitchell, Sons, & Candy, the house agents, could tell me
something, as he thought he remembered seeing the name of that firm on
the board. I did not wish to seem too eager, or to let my informant know
or guess too much, so, thanking him in the usual manner, I strolled
away. It was now growing dusk, and the autumn night was closing in, so I
did not lose any time. Having learned the address of Mitchell, Sons, &
Candy from a directory at the Berkeley, I was soon at their office in
Sackville Street.

The gentleman who saw me was particularly suave in manner, but
uncommunicative in equal proportion. Having once told me that the
Piccadilly house--which throughout our interview he called a
"mansion"--was sold, he considered my business as concluded. When I
asked who had purchased it, he opened his eyes a thought wider, and
paused a few seconds before replying:--

"It is sold, sir."

"Pardon me," I said, with equal politeness, "but I have a special reason
for wishing to know who purchased it."

Again he paused longer, and raised his eyebrows still more. "It is sold,
sir," was again his laconic reply.

"Surely," I said, "you do not mind letting me know so much."

"But I do mind," he answered. "The affairs of their clients are
absolutely safe in the hands of Mitchell, Sons, & Candy." This was
manifestly a prig of the first water, and there was no use arguing with
him. I thought I had best meet him on his own ground, so I said:--

"Your clients, sir, are happy in having so resolute a guardian of their
confidence. I am myself a professional man." Here I handed him my card.
"In this instance I am not prompted by curiosity; I act on the part of
Lord Godalming, who wishes to know something of the property which was,
he understood, lately for sale." These words put a different complexion
on affairs. He said:--

"I would like to oblige you if I could, Mr. Harker, and especially would
I like to oblige his lordship. We once carried out a small matter of
renting some chambers for him when he was the Honourable Arthur
Holmwood. If you will let me have his lordship's address I will consult
the House on the subject, and will, in any case, communicate with his
lordship by to-night's post. It will be a pleasure if we can so far
deviate from our rules as to give the required information to his
lordship."

I wanted to secure a friend, and not to make an enemy, so I thanked him,
gave the address at Dr. Seward's and came away. It was now dark, and I
was tired and hungry. I got a cup of tea at the Aërated Bread Company
and came down to Purfleet by the next train.

I found all the others at home. Mina was looking tired and pale, but she
made a gallant effort to be bright and cheerful, it wrung my heart to
think that I had had to keep anything from her and so caused her
inquietude. Thank God, this will be the last night of her looking on at
our conferences, and feeling the sting of our not showing our
confidence. It took all my courage to hold to the wise resolution of
keeping her out of our grim task. She seems somehow more reconciled; or
else the very subject seems to have become repugnant to her, for when
any accidental allusion is made she actually shudders. I am glad we
made our resolution in time, as with such a feeling as this, our growing
knowledge would be torture to her.

I could not tell the others of the day's discovery till we were alone;
so after dinner--followed by a little music to save appearances even
amongst ourselves--I took Mina to her room and left her to go to bed.
The dear girl was more affectionate with me than ever, and clung to me
as though she would detain me; but there was much to be talked of and I
came away. Thank God, the ceasing of telling things has made no
difference between us.

When I came down again I found the others all gathered round the fire in
the study. In the train I had written my diary so far, and simply read
it off to them as the best means of letting them get abreast of my own
information; when I had finished Van Helsing said:--

"This has been a great day's work, friend Jonathan. Doubtless we are on
the track of the missing boxes. If we find them all in that house, then
our work is near the end. But if there be some missing, we must search
until we find them. Then shall we make our final _coup_, and hunt the
wretch to his real death." We all sat silent awhile and all at once Mr.
Morris spoke:--

"Say! how are we going to get into that house?"

"We got into the other," answered Lord Godalming quickly.

"But, Art, this is different. We broke house at Carfax, but we had night
and a walled park to protect us. It will be a mighty different thing to
commit burglary in Piccadilly, either by day or night. I confess I don't
see how we are going to get in unless that agency duck can find us a key
of some sort; perhaps we shall know when you get his letter in the
morning." Lord Godalming's brows contracted, and he stood up and walked
about the room. By-and-by he stopped and said, turning from one to
another of us:--

"Quincey's head is level. This burglary business is getting serious; we
got off once all right; but we have now a rare job on hand--unless we
can find the Count's key basket."

As nothing could well be done before morning, and as it would be at
least advisable to wait till Lord Godalming should hear from Mitchell's,
we decided not to take any active step before breakfast time. For a good
while we sat and smoked, discussing the matter in its various lights and
bearings; I took the opportunity of bringing this diary right up to the
moment. I am very sleepy and shall go to bed....

Just a line. Mina sleeps soundly and her breathing is regular. Her
forehead is puckered up into little wrinkles, as though she thinks even
in her sleep. She is still too pale, but does not look so haggard as she
did this morning. To-morrow will, I hope, mend all this; she will be
herself at home in Exeter. Oh, but I am sleepy!


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_1 October._--I am puzzled afresh about Renfield. His moods change so
rapidly that I find it difficult to keep touch of them, and as they
always mean something more than his own well-being, they form a more
than interesting study. This morning, when I went to see him after his
repulse of Van Helsing, his manner was that of a man commanding destiny.
He was, in fact, commanding destiny--subjectively. He did not really
care for any of the things of mere earth; he was in the clouds and
looked down on all the weaknesses and wants of us poor mortals. I
thought I would improve the occasion and learn something, so I asked
him:--

"What about the flies these times?" He smiled on me in quite a superior
sort of way--such a smile as would have become the face of Malvolio--as
he answered me:--

"The fly, my dear sir, has one striking feature; its wings are typical
of the aërial powers of the psychic faculties. The ancients did well
when they typified the soul as a butterfly!"

I thought I would push his analogy to its utmost logically, so I said
quickly:--

"Oh, it is a soul you are after now, is it?" His madness foiled his
reason, and a puzzled look spread over his face as, shaking his head
with a decision which I had but seldom seen in him, he said:--

"Oh, no, oh no! I want no souls. Life is all I want." Here he brightened
up; "I am pretty indifferent about it at present. Life is all right; I
have all I want. You must get a new patient, doctor, if you wish to
study zoöphagy!"

This puzzled me a little, so I drew him on:--

"Then you command life; you are a god, I suppose?" He smiled with an
ineffably benign superiority.

"Oh no! Far be it from me to arrogate to myself the attributes of the
Deity. I am not even concerned in His especially spiritual doings. If I
may state my intellectual position I am, so far as concerns things
purely terrestrial, somewhat in the position which Enoch occupied
spiritually!" This was a poser to me. I could not at the moment recall
Enoch's appositeness; so I had to ask a simple question, though I felt
that by so doing I was lowering myself in the eyes of the lunatic:--

"And why with Enoch?"

"Because he walked with God." I could not see the analogy, but did not
like to admit it; so I harked back to what he had denied:--

"So you don't care about life and you don't want souls. Why not?" I put
my question quickly and somewhat sternly, on purpose to disconcert him.
The effort succeeded; for an instant he unconsciously relapsed into his
old servile manner, bent low before me, and actually fawned upon me as
he replied:--

"I don't want any souls, indeed, indeed! I don't. I couldn't use them if
I had them; they would be no manner of use to me. I couldn't eat them
or----" He suddenly stopped and the old cunning look spread over his
face, like a wind-sweep on the surface of the water. "And doctor, as to
life, what is it after all? When you've got all you require, and you
know that you will never want, that is all. I have friends--good
friends--like you, Dr. Seward"; this was said with a leer of
inexpressible cunning. "I know that I shall never lack the means of
life!"

I think that through the cloudiness of his insanity he saw some
antagonism in me, for he at once fell back on the last refuge of such as
he--a dogged silence. After a short time I saw that for the present it
was useless to speak to him. He was sulky, and so I came away.

Later in the day he sent for me. Ordinarily I would not have come
without special reason, but just at present I am so interested in him
that I would gladly make an effort. Besides, I am glad to have anything
to help to pass the time. Harker is out, following up clues; and so are
Lord Godalming and Quincey. Van Helsing sits in my study poring over the
record prepared by the Harkers; he seems to think that by accurate
knowledge of all details he will light upon some clue. He does not wish
to be disturbed in the work, without cause. I would have taken him with
me to see the patient, only I thought that after his last repulse he
might not care to go again. There was also another reason: Renfield
might not speak so freely before a third person as when he and I were
alone.

I found him sitting out in the middle of the floor on his stool, a pose
which is generally indicative of some mental energy on his part. When I
came in, he said at once, as though the question had been waiting on his
lips:--

"What about souls?" It was evident then that my surmise had been
correct. Unconscious cerebration was doing its work, even with the
lunatic. I determined to have the matter out. "What about them
yourself?" I asked. He did not reply for a moment but looked all round
him, and up and down, as though he expected to find some inspiration for
an answer.

"I don't want any souls!" he said in a feeble, apologetic way. The
matter seemed preying on his mind, and so I determined to use it--to "be
cruel only to be kind." So I said:--

"You like life, and you want life?"

"Oh yes! but that is all right; you needn't worry about that!"

"But," I asked, "how are we to get the life without getting the soul
also?" This seemed to puzzle him, so I followed it up:--

"A nice time you'll have some time when you're flying out there, with
the souls of thousands of flies and spiders and birds and cats buzzing
and twittering and miauing all round you. You've got their lives, you
know, and you must put up with their souls!" Something seemed to affect
his imagination, for he put his fingers to his ears and shut his eyes,
screwing them up tightly just as a small boy does when his face is being
soaped. There was something pathetic in it that touched me; it also gave
me a lesson, for it seemed that before me was a child--only a child,
though the features were worn, and the stubble on the jaws was white. It
was evident that he was undergoing some process of mental disturbance,
and, knowing how his past moods had interpreted things seemingly foreign
to himself, I thought I would enter into his mind as well as I could and
go with him. The first step was to restore confidence, so I asked him,
speaking pretty loud so that he would hear me through his closed ears:--

"Would you like some sugar to get your flies round again?" He seemed to
wake up all at once, and shook his head. With a laugh he replied:--

"Not much! flies are poor things, after all!" After a pause he added,
"But I don't want their souls buzzing round me, all the same."

"Or spiders?" I went on.

"Blow spiders! What's the use of spiders? There isn't anything in them
to eat or"--he stopped suddenly, as though reminded of a forbidden
topic.

"So, so!" I thought to myself, "this is the second time he has suddenly
stopped at the word 'drink'; what does it mean?" Renfield seemed himself
aware of having made a lapse, for he hurried on, as though to distract
my attention from it:--

"I don't take any stock at all in such matters. 'Rats and mice and such
small deer,' as Shakespeare has it, 'chicken-feed of the larder' they
might be called. I'm past all that sort of nonsense. You might as well
ask a man to eat molecules with a pair of chop-sticks, as to try to
interest me about the lesser carnivora, when I know of what is before
me."

"I see," I said. "You want big things that you can make your teeth meet
in? How would you like to breakfast on elephant?"

"What ridiculous nonsense you are talking!" He was getting too wide
awake, so I thought I would press him hard. "I wonder," I said
reflectively, "what an elephant's soul is like!"

The effect I desired was obtained, for he at once fell from his
high-horse and became a child again.

"I don't want an elephant's soul, or any soul at all!" he said. For a
few moments he sat despondently. Suddenly he jumped to his feet, with
his eyes blazing and all the signs of intense cerebral excitement. "To
hell with you and your souls!" he shouted. "Why do you plague me about
souls? Haven't I got enough to worry, and pain, and distract me already,
without thinking of souls!" He looked so hostile that I thought he was
in for another homicidal fit, so I blew my whistle. The instant,
however, that I did so he became calm, and said apologetically:--

"Forgive me, Doctor; I forgot myself. You do not need any help. I am so
worried in my mind that I am apt to be irritable. If you only knew the
problem I have to face, and that I am working out, you would pity, and
tolerate, and pardon me. Pray do not put me in a strait-waistcoat. I
want to think and I cannot think freely when my body is confined. I am
sure you will understand!" He had evidently self-control; so when the
attendants came I told them not to mind, and they withdrew. Renfield
watched them go; when the door was closed he said, with considerable
dignity and sweetness:--

"Dr. Seward, you have been very considerate towards me. Believe me that
I am very, very grateful to you!" I thought it well to leave him in this
mood, and so I came away. There is certainly something to ponder over in
this man's state. Several points seem to make what the American
interviewer calls "a story," if one could only get them in proper order.
Here they are:--

Will not mention "drinking."

Fears the thought of being burdened with the "soul" of anything.

Has no dread of wanting "life" in the future.

Despises the meaner forms of life altogether, though he dreads being
haunted by their souls.

Logically all these things point one way! he has assurance of some kind
that he will acquire some higher life. He dreads the consequence--the
burden of a soul. Then it is a human life he looks to!

And the assurance--?

Merciful God! the Count has been to him, and there is some new scheme of
terror afoot!

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--I went after my round to Van Helsing and told him my
suspicion. He grew very grave; and, after thinking the matter over for a
while asked me to take him to Renfield. I did so. As we came to the door
we heard the lunatic within singing gaily, as he used to do in the time
which now seems so long ago. When we entered we saw with amazement that
he had spread out his sugar as of old; the flies, lethargic with the
autumn, were beginning to buzz into the room. We tried to make him talk
of the subject of our previous conversation, but he would not attend. He
went on with his singing, just as though we had not been present. He had
got a scrap of paper and was folding it into a note-book. We had to come
away as ignorant as we went in.

His is a curious case indeed; we must watch him to-night.


_Letter, Mitchell, Sons and Candy to Lord Godalming._

_"1 October._

"My Lord,

"We are at all times only too happy to meet your wishes. We beg, with
regard to the desire of your Lordship, expressed by Mr. Harker on your
behalf, to supply the following information concerning the sale and
purchase of No. 347, Piccadilly. The original vendors are the executors
of the late Mr. Archibald Winter-Suffield. The purchaser is a foreign
nobleman, Count de Ville, who effected the purchase himself paying the
purchase money in notes 'over the counter,' if your Lordship will pardon
us using so vulgar an expression. Beyond this we know nothing whatever
of him.

"We are, my Lord,

"Your Lordship's humble servants,

"MITCHELL, SONS & CANDY."


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_2 October._--I placed a man in the corridor last night, and told him to
make an accurate note of any sound he might hear from Renfield's room,
and gave him instructions that if there should be anything strange he
was to call me. After dinner, when we had all gathered round the fire
in the study--Mrs. Harker having gone to bed--we discussed the attempts
and discoveries of the day. Harker was the only one who had any result,
and we are in great hopes that his clue may be an important one.

Before going to bed I went round to the patient's room and looked in
through the observation trap. He was sleeping soundly, and his heart
rose and fell with regular respiration.

This morning the man on duty reported to me that a little after midnight
he was restless and kept saying his prayers somewhat loudly. I asked him
if that was all; he replied that it was all he heard. There was
something about his manner so suspicious that I asked him point blank if
he had been asleep. He denied sleep, but admitted to having "dozed" for
a while. It is too bad that men cannot be trusted unless they are
watched.

To-day Harker is out following up his clue, and Art and Quincey are
looking after horses. Godalming thinks that it will be well to have
horses always in readiness, for when we get the information which we
seek there will be no time to lose. We must sterilise all the imported
earth between sunrise and sunset; we shall thus catch the Count at his
weakest, and without a refuge to fly to. Van Helsing is off to the
British Museum looking up some authorities on ancient medicine. The old
physicians took account of things which their followers do not accept,
and the Professor is searching for witch and demon cures which may be
useful to us later.

I sometimes think we must be all mad and that we shall wake to sanity in
strait-waistcoats.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--We have met again. We seem at last to be on the track, and our
work of to-morrow may be the beginning of the end. I wonder if
Renfield's quiet has anything to do with this. His moods have so
followed the doings of the Count, that the coming destruction of the
monster may be carried to him in some subtle way. If we could only get
some hint as to what passed in his mind, between the time of my argument
with him to-day and his resumption of fly-catching, it might afford us a
valuable clue. He is now seemingly quiet for a spell.... Is he?---- That
wild yell seemed to come from his room....

       *       *       *       *       *

The attendant came bursting into my room and told me that Renfield had
somehow met with some accident. He had heard him yell; and when he went
to him found him lying on his face on the floor, all covered with blood.
I must go at once....




CHAPTER XXI

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


_3 October._--Let me put down with exactness all that happened, as well
as I can remember it, since last I made an entry. Not a detail that I
can recall must be forgotten; in all calmness I must proceed.

When I came to Renfield's room I found him lying on the floor on his
left side in a glittering pool of blood. When I went to move him, it
became at once apparent that he had received some terrible injuries;
there seemed none of that unity of purpose between the parts of the body
which marks even lethargic sanity. As the face was exposed I could see
that it was horribly bruised, as though it had been beaten against the
floor--indeed it was from the face wounds that the pool of blood
originated. The attendant who was kneeling beside the body said to me as
we turned him over:--

"I think, sir, his back is broken. See, both his right arm and leg and
the whole side of his face are paralysed." How such a thing could have
happened puzzled the attendant beyond measure. He seemed quite
bewildered, and his brows were gathered in as he said:--

"I can't understand the two things. He could mark his face like that by
beating his own head on the floor. I saw a young woman do it once at the
Eversfield Asylum before anyone could lay hands on her. And I suppose he
might have broke his neck by falling out of bed, if he got in an awkward
kink. But for the life of me I can't imagine how the two things
occurred. If his back was broke, he couldn't beat his head; and if his
face was like that before the fall out of bed, there would be marks of
it." I said to him:--

"Go to Dr. Van Helsing, and ask him to kindly come here at once. I want
him without an instant's delay." The man ran off, and within a few
minutes the Professor, in his dressing gown and slippers, appeared. When
he saw Renfield on the ground, he looked keenly at him a moment, and
then turned to me. I think he recognised my thought in my eyes, for he
said very quietly, manifestly for the ears of the attendant:--

"Ah, a sad accident! He will need very careful watching, and much
attention. I shall stay with you myself; but I shall first dress myself.
If you will remain I shall in a few minutes join you."

The patient was now breathing stertorously and it was easy to see that
he had suffered some terrible injury. Van Helsing returned with
extraordinary celerity, bearing with him a surgical case. He had
evidently been thinking and had his mind made up; for, almost before he
looked at the patient, he whispered to me:--

"Send the attendant away. We must be alone with him when he becomes
conscious, after the operation." So I said:--

"I think that will do now, Simmons. We have done all that we can at
present. You had better go your round, and Dr. Van Helsing will operate.
Let me know instantly if there be anything unusual anywhere."

The man withdrew, and we went into a strict examination of the patient.
The wounds of the face was superficial; the real injury was a depressed
fracture of the skull, extending right up through the motor area. The
Professor thought a moment and said:--

"We must reduce the pressure and get back to normal conditions, as far
as can be; the rapidity of the suffusion shows the terrible nature of
his injury. The whole motor area seems affected. The suffusion of the
brain will increase quickly, so we must trephine at once or it may be
too late." As he was speaking there was a soft tapping at the door. I
went over and opened it and found in the corridor without, Arthur and
Quincey in pajamas and slippers: the former spoke:--

"I heard your man call up Dr. Van Helsing and tell him of an accident.
So I woke Quincey or rather called for him as he was not asleep. Things
are moving too quickly and too strangely for sound sleep for any of us
these times. I've been thinking that to-morrow night will not see things
as they have been. We'll have to look back--and forward a little more
than we have done. May we come in?" I nodded, and held the door open
till they had entered; then I closed it again. When Quincey saw the
attitude and state of the patient, and noted the horrible pool on the
floor, he said softly:--

"My God! what has happened to him? Poor, poor devil!" I told him
briefly, and added that we expected he would recover consciousness after
the operation--for a short time, at all events. He went at once and sat
down on the edge of the bed, with Godalming beside him; we all watched
in patience.

"We shall wait," said Van Helsing, "just long enough to fix the best
spot for trephining, so that we may most quickly and perfectly remove
the blood clot; for it is evident that the hæmorrhage is increasing."

The minutes during which we waited passed with fearful slowness. I had a
horrible sinking in my heart, and from Van Helsing's face I gathered
that he felt some fear or apprehension as to what was to come. I dreaded
the words that Renfield might speak. I was positively afraid to think;
but the conviction of what was coming was on me, as I have read of men
who have heard the death-watch. The poor man's breathing came in
uncertain gasps. Each instant he seemed as though he would open his eyes
and speak; but then would follow a prolonged stertorous breath, and he
would relapse into a more fixed insensibility. Inured as I was to sick
beds and death, this suspense grew, and grew upon me. I could almost
hear the beating of my own heart; and the blood surging through my
temples sounded like blows from a hammer. The silence finally became
agonising. I looked at my companions, one after another, and saw from
their flushed faces and damp brows that they were enduring equal
torture. There was a nervous suspense over us all, as though overhead
some dread bell would peal out powerfully when we should least expect
it.

At last there came a time when it was evident that the patient was
sinking fast; he might die at any moment. I looked up at the Professor
and caught his eyes fixed on mine. His face was sternly set as he
spoke:--

"There is no time to lose. His words may be worth many lives; I have
been thinking so, as I stood here. It may be there is a soul at stake!
We shall operate just above the ear."

Without another word he made the operation. For a few moments the
breathing continued to be stertorous. Then there came a breath so
prolonged that it seemed as though it would tear open his chest.
Suddenly his eyes opened, and became fixed in a wild, helpless stare.
This was continued for a few moments; then it softened into a glad
surprise, and from the lips came a sigh of relief. He moved
convulsively, and as he did so, said:--

"I'll be quiet, Doctor. Tell them to take off the strait-waistcoat. I
have had a terrible dream, and it has left me so weak that I cannot
move. What's wrong with my face? it feels all swollen, and it smarts
dreadfully." He tried to turn his head; but even with the effort his
eyes seemed to grow glassy again so I gently put it back. Then Van
Helsing said in a quiet grave tone:--

"Tell us your dream, Mr. Renfield." As he heard the voice his face
brightened, through its mutilation, and he said:--

"That is Dr. Van Helsing. How good it is of you to be here. Give me some
water, my lips are dry; and I shall try to tell you. I dreamed"--he
stopped and seemed fainting, I called quietly to Quincey--"The
brandy--it is in my study--quick!" He flew and returned with a glass,
the decanter of brandy and a carafe of water. We moistened the parched
lips, and the patient quickly revived. It seemed, however, that his poor
injured brain had been working in the interval, for, when he was quite
conscious, he looked at me piercingly with an agonised confusion which I
shall never forget, and said:--

"I must not deceive myself; it was no dream, but all a grim reality."
Then his eyes roved round the room; as they caught sight of the two
figures sitting patiently on the edge of the bed he went on:--

"If I were not sure already, I would know from them." For an instant his
eyes closed--not with pain or sleep but voluntarily, as though he were
bringing all his faculties to bear; when he opened them he said,
hurriedly, and with more energy than he had yet displayed:--

"Quick, Doctor, quick. I am dying! I feel that I have but a few minutes;
and then I must go back to death--or worse! Wet my lips with brandy
again. I have something that I must say before I die; or before my poor
crushed brain dies anyhow. Thank you! It was that night after you left
me, when I implored you to let me go away. I couldn't speak then, for I
felt my tongue was tied; but I was as sane then, except in that way, as
I am now. I was in an agony of despair for a long time after you left
me; it seemed hours. Then there came a sudden peace to me. My brain
seemed to become cool again, and I realised where I was. I heard the
dogs bark behind our house, but not where He was!" As he spoke, Van
Helsing's eyes never blinked, but his hand came out and met mine and
gripped it hard. He did not, however, betray himself; he nodded slightly
and said: "Go on," in a low voice. Renfield proceeded:--

"He came up to the window in the mist, as I had seen him often before;
but he was solid then--not a ghost, and his eyes were fierce like a
man's when angry. He was laughing with his red mouth; the sharp white
teeth glinted in the moonlight when he turned to look back over the belt
of trees, to where the dogs were barking. I wouldn't ask him to come in
at first, though I knew he wanted to--just as he had wanted all along.
Then he began promising me things--not in words but by doing them." He
was interrupted by a word from the Professor:--

"How?"

"By making them happen; just as he used to send in the flies when the
sun was shining. Great big fat ones with steel and sapphire on their
wings; and big moths, in the night, with skull and cross-bones on their
backs." Van Helsing nodded to him as he whispered to me unconsciously:--

"The _Acherontia Aitetropos of the Sphinges_--what you call the
'Death's-head Moth'?" The patient went on without stopping.

"Then he began to whisper: 'Rats, rats, rats! Hundreds, thousands,
millions of them, and every one a life; and dogs to eat them, and cats
too. All lives! all red blood, with years of life in it; and not merely
buzzing flies!' I laughed at him, for I wanted to see what he could do.
Then the dogs howled, away beyond the dark trees in His house. He
beckoned me to the window. I got up and looked out, and He raised his
hands, and seemed to call out without using any words. A dark mass
spread over the grass, coming on like the shape of a flame of fire; and
then He moved the mist to the right and left, and I could see that there
were thousands of rats with their eyes blazing red--like His, only
smaller. He held up his hand, and they all stopped; and I thought he
seemed to be saying: 'All these lives will I give you, ay, and many more
and greater, through countless ages, if you will fall down and worship
me!' And then a red cloud, like the colour of blood, seemed to close
over my eyes; and before I knew what I was doing, I found myself opening
the sash and saying to Him: 'Come in, Lord and Master!' The rats were
all gone, but He slid into the room through the sash, though it was only
open an inch wide--just as the Moon herself has often come in through
the tiniest crack and has stood before me in all her size and
splendour."

His voice was weaker, so I moistened his lips with the brandy again, and
he continued; but it seemed as though his memory had gone on working in
the interval for his story was further advanced. I was about to call him
back to the point, but Van Helsing whispered to me: "Let him go on. Do
not interrupt him; he cannot go back, and maybe could not proceed at all
if once he lost the thread of his thought." He proceeded:--

"All day I waited to hear from him, but he did not send me anything, not
even a blow-fly, and when the moon got up I was pretty angry with him.
When he slid in through the window, though it was shut, and did not even
knock, I got mad with him. He sneered at me, and his white face looked
out of the mist with his red eyes gleaming, and he went on as though he
owned the whole place, and I was no one. He didn't even smell the same
as he went by me. I couldn't hold him. I thought that, somehow, Mrs.
Harker had come into the room."

The two men sitting on the bed stood up and came over, standing behind
him so that he could not see them, but where they could hear better.
They were both silent, but the Professor started and quivered; his face,
however, grew grimmer and sterner still. Renfield went on without
noticing:--

"When Mrs. Harker came in to see me this afternoon she wasn't the same;
it was like tea after the teapot had been watered." Here we all moved,
but no one said a word; he went on:--

"I didn't know that she was here till she spoke; and she didn't look the
same. I don't care for the pale people; I like them with lots of blood
in them, and hers had all seemed to have run out. I didn't think of it
at the time; but when she went away I began to think, and it made me mad
to know that He had been taking the life out of her." I could feel that
the rest quivered, as I did, but we remained otherwise still. "So when
He came to-night I was ready for Him. I saw the mist stealing in, and I
grabbed it tight. I had heard that madmen have unnatural strength; and
as I knew I was a madman--at times anyhow--I resolved to use my power.
Ay, and He felt it too, for He had to come out of the mist to struggle
with me. I held tight; and I thought I was going to win, for I didn't
mean Him to take any more of her life, till I saw His eyes. They burned
into me, and my strength became like water. He slipped through it, and
when I tried to cling to Him, He raised me up and flung me down. There
was a red cloud before me, and a noise like thunder, and the mist seemed
to steal away under the door." His voice was becoming fainter and his
breath more stertorous. Van Helsing stood up instinctively.

"We know the worst now," he said. "He is here, and we know his purpose.
It may not be too late. Let us be armed--the same as we were the other
night, but lose no time; there is not an instant to spare." There was no
need to put our fear, nay our conviction, into words--we shared them in
common. We all hurried and took from our rooms the same things that we
had when we entered the Count's house. The Professor had his ready, and
as we met in the corridor he pointed to them significantly as he said:--

"They never leave me; and they shall not till this unhappy business is
over. Be wise also, my friends. It is no common enemy that we deal with.
Alas! alas! that that dear Madam Mina should suffer!" He stopped; his
voice was breaking, and I do not know if rage or terror predominated in
my own heart.

Outside the Harkers' door we paused. Art and Quincey held back, and the
latter said:--

"Should we disturb her?"

"We must," said Van Helsing grimly. "If the door be locked, I shall
break it in."

"May it not frighten her terribly? It is unusual to break into a lady's
room!"

Van Helsing said solemnly, "You are always right; but this is life and
death. All chambers are alike to the doctor; and even were they not they
are all as one to me to-night. Friend John, when I turn the handle, if
the door does not open, do you put your shoulder down and shove; and you
too, my friends. Now!"

He turned the handle as he spoke, but the door did not yield. We threw
ourselves against it; with a crash it burst open, and we almost fell
headlong into the room. The Professor did actually fall, and I saw
across him as he gathered himself up from hands and knees. What I saw
appalled me. I felt my hair rise like bristles on the back of my neck,
and my heart seemed to stand still.

The moonlight was so bright that through the thick yellow blind the room
was light enough to see. On the bed beside the window lay Jonathan
Harker, his face flushed and breathing heavily as though in a stupor.
Kneeling on the near edge of the bed facing outwards was the white-clad
figure of his wife. By her side stood a tall, thin man, clad in black.
His face was turned from us, but the instant we saw we all recognised
the Count--in every way, even to the scar on his forehead. With his left
hand he held both Mrs. Harker's hands, keeping them away with her arms
at full tension; his right hand gripped her by the back of the neck,
forcing her face down on his bosom. Her white nightdress was smeared
with blood, and a thin stream trickled down the man's bare breast which
was shown by his torn-open dress. The attitude of the two had a terrible
resemblance to a child forcing a kitten's nose into a saucer of milk to
compel it to drink. As we burst into the room, the Count turned his
face, and the hellish look that I had heard described seemed to leap
into it. His eyes flamed red with devilish passion; the great nostrils
of the white aquiline nose opened wide and quivered at the edge; and the
white sharp teeth, behind the full lips of the blood-dripping mouth,
champed together like those of a wild beast. With a wrench, which threw
his victim back upon the bed as though hurled from a height, he turned
and sprang at us. But by this time the Professor had gained his feet,
and was holding towards him the envelope which contained the Sacred
Wafer. The Count suddenly stopped, just as poor Lucy had done outside
the tomb, and cowered back. Further and further back he cowered, as we,
lifting our crucifixes, advanced. The moonlight suddenly failed, as a
great black cloud sailed across the sky; and when the gaslight sprang up
under Quincey's match, we saw nothing but a faint vapour. This, as we
looked, trailed under the door, which with the recoil from its bursting
open, had swung back to its old position. Van Helsing, Art, and I moved
forward to Mrs. Harker, who by this time had drawn her breath and with
it had given a scream so wild, so ear-piercing, so despairing that it
seems to me now that it will ring in my ears till my dying day. For a
few seconds she lay in her helpless attitude and disarray. Her face was
ghastly, with a pallor which was accentuated by the blood which smeared
her lips and cheeks and chin; from her throat trickled a thin stream of
blood; her eyes were mad with terror. Then she put before her face her
poor crushed hands, which bore on their whiteness the red mark of the
Count's terrible grip, and from behind them came a low desolate wail
which made the terrible scream seem only the quick expression of an
endless grief. Van Helsing stepped forward and drew the coverlet gently
over her body, whilst Art, after looking at her face for an instant
despairingly, ran out of the room. Van Helsing whispered to me:--

"Jonathan is in a stupor such as we know the Vampire can produce. We can
do nothing with poor Madam Mina for a few moments till she recovers
herself; I must wake him!" He dipped the end of a towel in cold water
and with it began to flick him on the face, his wife all the while
holding her face between her hands and sobbing in a way that was
heart-breaking to hear. I raised the blind, and looked out of the
window. There was much moonshine; and as I looked I could see Quincey
Morris run across the lawn and hide himself in the shadow of a great
yew-tree. It puzzled me to think why he was doing this; but at the
instant I heard Harker's quick exclamation as he woke to partial
consciousness, and turned to the bed. On his face, as there might well
be, was a look of wild amazement. He seemed dazed for a few seconds, and
then full consciousness seemed to burst upon him all at once, and he
started up. His wife was aroused by the quick movement, and turned to
him with her arms stretched out, as though to embrace him; instantly,
however, she drew them in again, and putting her elbows together, held
her hands before her face, and shuddered till the bed beneath her shook.

"In God's name what does this mean?" Harker cried out. "Dr. Seward, Dr.
Van Helsing, what is it? What has happened? What is wrong? Mina, dear,
what is it? What does that blood mean? My God, my God! has it come to
this!" and, raising himself to his knees, he beat his hands wildly
together. "Good God help us! help her! oh, help her!" With a quick
movement he jumped from bed, and began to pull on his clothes,--all the
man in him awake at the need for instant exertion. "What has happened?
Tell me all about it!" he cried without pausing. "Dr. Van Helsing, you
love Mina, I know. Oh, do something to save her. It cannot have gone too
far yet. Guard her while I look for _him_!" His wife, through her terror
and horror and distress, saw some sure danger to him: instantly
forgetting her own grief, she seized hold of him and cried out:--

"No! no! Jonathan, you must not leave me. I have suffered enough
to-night, God knows, without the dread of his harming you. You must stay
with me. Stay with these friends who will watch over you!" Her
expression became frantic as she spoke; and, he yielding to her, she
pulled him down sitting on the bed side, and clung to him fiercely.

Van Helsing and I tried to calm them both. The Professor held up his
little golden crucifix, and said with wonderful calmness:--

"Do not fear, my dear. We are here; and whilst this is close to you no
foul thing can approach. You are safe for to-night; and we must be calm
and take counsel together." She shuddered and was silent, holding down
her head on her husband's breast. When she raised it, his white
night-robe was stained with blood where her lips had touched, and where
the thin open wound in her neck had sent forth drops. The instant she
saw it she drew back, with a low wail, and whispered, amidst choking
sobs:--

"Unclean, unclean! I must touch him or kiss him no more. Oh, that it
should be that it is I who am now his worst enemy, and whom he may have
most cause to fear." To this he spoke out resolutely:--

"Nonsense, Mina. It is a shame to me to hear such a word. I would not
hear it of you; and I shall not hear it from you. May God judge me by my
deserts, and punish me with more bitter suffering than even this hour,
if by any act or will of mine anything ever come between us!" He put out
his arms and folded her to his breast; and for a while she lay there
sobbing. He looked at us over her bowed head, with eyes that blinked
damply above his quivering nostrils; his mouth was set as steel. After a
while her sobs became less frequent and more faint, and then he said to
me, speaking with a studied calmness which I felt tried his nervous
power to the utmost:--

"And now, Dr. Seward, tell me all about it. Too well I know the broad
fact; tell me all that has been." I told him exactly what had happened,
and he listened with seeming impassiveness; but his nostrils twitched
and his eyes blazed as I told how the ruthless hands of the Count had
held his wife in that terrible and horrid position, with her mouth to
the open wound in his breast. It interested me, even at that moment, to
see, that, whilst the face of white set passion worked convulsively over
the bowed head, the hands tenderly and lovingly stroked the ruffled
hair. Just as I had finished, Quincey and Godalming knocked at the door.
They entered in obedience to our summons. Van Helsing looked at me
questioningly. I understood him to mean if we were to take advantage of
their coming to divert if possible the thoughts of the unhappy husband
and wife from each other and from themselves; so on nodding acquiescence
to him he asked them what they had seen or done. To which Lord Godalming
answered:--

"I could not see him anywhere in the passage, or in any of our rooms. I
looked in the study but, though he had been there, he had gone. He had,
however----" He stopped suddenly, looking at the poor drooping figure on
the bed. Van Helsing said gravely:--

"Go on, friend Arthur. We want here no more concealments. Our hope now
is in knowing all. Tell freely!" So Art went on:--

"He had been there, and though it could only have been for a few
seconds, he made rare hay of the place. All the manuscript had been
burned, and the blue flames were flickering amongst the white ashes; the
cylinders of your phonograph too were thrown on the fire, and the wax
had helped the flames." Here I interrupted. "Thank God there is the
other copy in the safe!" His face lit for a moment, but fell again as he
went on: "I ran downstairs then, but could see no sign of him. I looked
into Renfield's room; but there was no trace there except----!" Again he
paused. "Go on," said Harker hoarsely; so he bowed his head and
moistening his lips with his tongue, added: "except that the poor fellow
is dead." Mrs. Harker raised her head, looking from one to the other of
us she said solemnly:--

"God's will be done!" I could not but feel that Art was keeping back
something; but, as I took it that it was with a purpose, I said nothing.
Van Helsing turned to Morris and asked:--

"And you, friend Quincey, have you any to tell?"

"A little," he answered. "It may be much eventually, but at present I
can't say. I thought it well to know if possible where the Count would
go when he left the house. I did not see him; but I saw a bat rise from
Renfield's window, and flap westward. I expected to see him in some
shape go back to Carfax; but he evidently sought some other lair. He
will not be back to-night; for the sky is reddening in the east, and the
dawn is close. We must work to-morrow!"

He said the latter words through his shut teeth. For a space of perhaps
a couple of minutes there was silence, and I could fancy that I could
hear the sound of our hearts beating; then Van Helsing said, placing his
hand very tenderly on Mrs. Harker's head:--

"And now, Madam Mina--poor, dear, dear Madam Mina--tell us exactly what
happened. God knows that I do not want that you be pained; but it is
need that we know all. For now more than ever has all work to be done
quick and sharp, and in deadly earnest. The day is close to us that must
end all, if it may be so; and now is the chance that we may live and
learn."

The poor, dear lady shivered, and I could see the tension of her nerves
as she clasped her husband closer to her and bent her head lower and
lower still on his breast. Then she raised her head proudly, and held
out one hand to Van Helsing who took it in his, and, after stooping and
kissing it reverently, held it fast. The other hand was locked in that
of her husband, who held his other arm thrown round her protectingly.
After a pause in which she was evidently ordering her thoughts, she
began:--

"I took the sleeping draught which you had so kindly given me, but for a
long time it did not act. I seemed to become more wakeful, and myriads
of horrible fancies began to crowd in upon my mind--all of them
connected with death, and vampires; with blood, and pain, and trouble."
Her husband involuntarily groaned as she turned to him and said
lovingly: "Do not fret, dear. You must be brave and strong, and help me
through the horrible task. If you only knew what an effort it is to me
to tell of this fearful thing at all, you would understand how much I
need your help. Well, I saw I must try to help the medicine to its work
with my will, if it was to do me any good, so I resolutely set myself to
sleep. Sure enough sleep must soon have come to me, for I remember no
more. Jonathan coming in had not waked me, for he lay by my side when
next I remember. There was in the room the same thin white mist that I
had before noticed. But I forget now if you know of this; you will find
it in my diary which I shall show you later. I felt the same vague
terror which had come to me before and the same sense of some presence.
I turned to wake Jonathan, but found that he slept so soundly that it
seemed as if it was he who had taken the sleeping draught, and not I. I
tried, but I could not wake him. This caused me a great fear, and I
looked around terrified. Then indeed, my heart sank within me: beside
the bed, as if he had stepped out of the mist--or rather as if the mist
had turned into his figure, for it had entirely disappeared--stood a
tall, thin man, all in black. I knew him at once from the description of
the others. The waxen face; the high aquiline nose, on which the light
fell in a thin white line; the parted red lips, with the sharp white
teeth showing between; and the red eyes that I had seemed to see in the
sunset on the windows of St. Mary's Church at Whitby. I knew, too, the
red scar on his forehead where Jonathan had struck him. For an instant
my heart stood still, and I would have screamed out, only that I was
paralysed. In the pause he spoke in a sort of keen, cutting whisper,
pointing as he spoke to Jonathan:--

"'Silence! If you make a sound I shall take him and dash his brains out
before your very eyes.' I was appalled and was too bewildered to do or
say anything. With a mocking smile, he placed one hand upon my shoulder
and, holding me tight, bared my throat with the other, saying as he did
so, 'First, a little refreshment to reward my exertions. You may as well
be quiet; it is not the first time, or the second, that your veins have
appeased my thirst!' I was bewildered, and, strangely enough, I did not
want to hinder him. I suppose it is a part of the horrible curse that
such is, when his touch is on his victim. And oh, my God, my God, pity
me! He placed his reeking lips upon my throat!" Her husband groaned
again. She clasped his hand harder, and looked at him pityingly, as if
he were the injured one, and went on:--

"I felt my strength fading away, and I was in a half swoon. How long
this horrible thing lasted I know not; but it seemed that a long time
must have passed before he took his foul, awful, sneering mouth away. I
saw it drip with the fresh blood!" The remembrance seemed for a while to
overpower her, and she drooped and would have sunk down but for her
husband's sustaining arm. With a great effort she recovered herself and
went on:--

"Then he spoke to me mockingly, 'And so you, like the others, would play
your brains against mine. You would help these men to hunt me and
frustrate me in my designs! You know now, and they know in part already,
and will know in full before long, what it is to cross my path. They
should have kept their energies for use closer to home. Whilst they
played wits against me--against me who commanded nations, and intrigued
for them, and fought for them, hundreds of years before they were
born--I was countermining them. And you, their best beloved one, are now
to me, flesh of my flesh; blood of my blood; kin of my kin; my bountiful
wine-press for a while; and shall be later on my companion and my
helper. You shall be avenged in turn; for not one of them but shall
minister to your needs. But as yet you are to be punished for what you
have done. You have aided in thwarting me; now you shall come to my
call. When my brain says "Come!" to you, you shall cross land or sea to
do my bidding; and to that end this!' With that he pulled open his
shirt, and with his long sharp nails opened a vein in his breast. When
the blood began to spurt out, he took my hands in one of his, holding
them tight, and with the other seized my neck and pressed my mouth to
the wound, so that I must either suffocate or swallow some of the---- Oh
my God! my God! what have I done? What have I done to deserve such a
fate, I who have tried to walk in meekness and righteousness all my
days. God pity me! Look down on a poor soul in worse than mortal peril;
and in mercy pity those to whom she is dear!" Then she began to rub her
lips as though to cleanse them from pollution.

As she was telling her terrible story, the eastern sky began to quicken,
and everything became more and more clear. Harker was still and quiet;
but over his face, as the awful narrative went on, came a grey look
which deepened and deepened in the morning light, till when the first
red streak of the coming dawn shot up, the flesh stood darkly out
against the whitening hair.

We have arranged that one of us is to stay within call of the unhappy
pair till we can meet together and arrange about taking action.

Of this I am sure: the sun rises to-day on no more miserable house in
all the great round of its daily course.




CHAPTER XXII

JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL


_3 October._--As I must do something or go mad, I write this diary. It
is now six o'clock, and we are to meet in the study in half an hour and
take something to eat; for Dr. Van Helsing and Dr. Seward are agreed
that if we do not eat we cannot work our best. Our best will be, God
knows, required to-day. I must keep writing at every chance, for I dare
not stop to think. All, big and little, must go down; perhaps at the end
the little things may teach us most. The teaching, big or little, could
not have landed Mina or me anywhere worse than we are to-day. However,
we must trust and hope. Poor Mina told me just now, with the tears
running down her dear cheeks, that it is in trouble and trial that our
faith is tested--that we must keep on trusting; and that God will aid us
up to the end. The end! oh my God! what end?... To work! To work!

When Dr. Van Helsing and Dr. Seward had come back from seeing poor
Renfield, we went gravely into what was to be done. First, Dr. Seward
told us that when he and Dr. Van Helsing had gone down to the room below
they had found Renfield lying on the floor, all in a heap. His face was
all bruised and crushed in, and the bones of the neck were broken.

Dr. Seward asked the attendant who was on duty in the passage if he had
heard anything. He said that he had been sitting down--he confessed to
half dozing--when he heard loud voices in the room, and then Renfield
had called out loudly several times, "God! God! God!" after that there
was a sound of falling, and when he entered the room he found him lying
on the floor, face down, just as the doctors had seen him. Van Helsing
asked if he had heard "voices" or "a voice," and he said he could not
say; that at first it had seemed to him as if there were two, but as
there was no one in the room it could have been only one. He could swear
to it, if required, that the word "God" was spoken by the patient. Dr.
Seward said to us, when we were alone, that he did not wish to go into
the matter; the question of an inquest had to be considered, and it
would never do to put forward the truth, as no one would believe it. As
it was, he thought that on the attendant's evidence he could give a
certificate of death by misadventure in falling from bed. In case the
coroner should demand it, there would be a formal inquest, necessarily
to the same result.

When the question began to be discussed as to what should be our next
step, the very first thing we decided was that Mina should be in full
confidence; that nothing of any sort--no matter how painful--should be
kept from her. She herself agreed as to its wisdom, and it was pitiful
to see her so brave and yet so sorrowful, and in such a depth of
despair. "There must be no concealment," she said, "Alas! we have had
too much already. And besides there is nothing in all the world that can
give me more pain than I have already endured--than I suffer now!
Whatever may happen, it must be of new hope or of new courage to me!"
Van Helsing was looking at her fixedly as she spoke, and said, suddenly
but quietly:--

"But dear Madam Mina, are you not afraid; not for yourself, but for
others from yourself, after what has happened?" Her face grew set in its
lines, but her eyes shone with the devotion of a martyr as she
answered:--

"Ah no! for my mind is made up!"

"To what?" he asked gently, whilst we were all very still; for each in
our own way we had a sort of vague idea of what she meant. Her answer
came with direct simplicity, as though she were simply stating a fact:--

"Because if I find in myself--and I shall watch keenly for it--a sign of
harm to any that I love, I shall die!"

"You would not kill yourself?" he asked, hoarsely.

"I would; if there were no friend who loved me, who would save me such a
pain, and so desperate an effort!" She looked at him meaningly as she
spoke. He was sitting down; but now he rose and came close to her and
put his hand on her head as he said solemnly:

"My child, there is such an one if it were for your good. For myself I
could hold it in my account with God to find such an euthanasia for you,
even at this moment if it were best. Nay, were it safe! But my
child----" For a moment he seemed choked, and a great sob rose in his
throat; he gulped it down and went on:--

"There are here some who would stand between you and death. You must not
die. You must not die by any hand; but least of all by your own. Until
the other, who has fouled your sweet life, is true dead you must not
die; for if he is still with the quick Un-Dead, your death would make
you even as he is. No, you must live! You must struggle and strive to
live, though death would seem a boon unspeakable. You must fight Death
himself, though he come to you in pain or in joy; by the day, or the
night; in safety or in peril! On your living soul I charge you that you
do not die--nay, nor think of death--till this great evil be past." The
poor dear grew white as death, and shock and shivered, as I have seen a
quicksand shake and shiver at the incoming of the tide. We were all
silent; we could do nothing. At length she grew more calm and turning to
him said, sweetly, but oh! so sorrowfully, as she held out her hand:--

"I promise you, my dear friend, that if God will let me live, I shall
strive to do so; till, if it may be in His good time, this horror may
have passed away from me." She was so good and brave that we all felt
that our hearts were strengthened to work and endure for her, and we
began to discuss what we were to do. I told her that she was to have all
the papers in the safe, and all the papers or diaries and phonographs we
might hereafter use; and was to keep the record as she had done before.
She was pleased with the prospect of anything to do--if "pleased" could
be used in connection with so grim an interest.

As usual Van Helsing had thought ahead of everyone else, and was
prepared with an exact ordering of our work.

"It is perhaps well," he said, "that at our meeting after our visit to
Carfax we decided not to do anything with the earth-boxes that lay
there. Had we done so, the Count must have guessed our purpose, and
would doubtless have taken measures in advance to frustrate such an
effort with regard to the others; but now he does not know our
intentions. Nay, more, in all probability, he does not know that such a
power exists to us as can sterilise his lairs, so that he cannot use
them as of old. We are now so much further advanced in our knowledge as
to their disposition that, when we have examined the house in
Piccadilly, we may track the very last of them. To-day, then, is ours;
and in it rests our hope. The sun that rose on our sorrow this morning
guards us in its course. Until it sets to-night, that monster must
retain whatever form he now has. He is confined within the limitations
of his earthly envelope. He cannot melt into thin air nor disappear
through cracks or chinks or crannies. If he go through a doorway, he
must open the door like a mortal. And so we have this day to hunt out
all his lairs and sterilise them. So we shall, if we have not yet catch
him and destroy him, drive him to bay in some place where the catching
and the destroying shall be, in time, sure." Here I started up for I
could not contain myself at the thought that the minutes and seconds so
preciously laden with Mina's life and happiness were flying from us,
since whilst we talked action was impossible. But Van Helsing held up
his hand warningly. "Nay, friend Jonathan," he said, "in this, the
quickest way home is the longest way, so your proverb say. We shall all
act and act with desperate quick, when the time has come. But think, in
all probable the key of the situation is in that house in Piccadilly.
The Count may have many houses which he has bought. Of them he will have
deeds of purchase, keys and other things. He will have paper that he
write on; he will have his book of cheques. There are many belongings
that he must have somewhere; why not in this place so central, so quiet,
where he come and go by the front or the back at all hour, when in the
very vast of the traffic there is none to notice. We shall go there and
search that house; and when we learn what it holds, then we do what our
friend Arthur call, in his phrases of hunt 'stop the earths' and so we
run down our old fox--so? is it not?"

"Then let us come at once," I cried, "we are wasting the precious,
precious time!" The Professor did not move, but simply said:--

"And how are we to get into that house in Piccadilly?"

"Any way!" I cried. "We shall break in if need be."

"And your police; where will they be, and what will they say?"

I was staggered; but I knew that if he wished to delay he had a good
reason for it. So I said, as quietly as I could:--

"Don't wait more than need be; you know, I am sure, what torture I am
in."

"Ah, my child, that I do; and indeed there is no wish of me to add to
your anguish. But just think, what can we do, until all the world be at
movement. Then will come our time. I have thought and thought, and it
seems to me that the simplest way is the best of all. Now we wish to get
into the house, but we have no key; is it not so?" I nodded.

"Now suppose that you were, in truth, the owner of that house, and could
not still get in; and think there was to you no conscience of the
housebreaker, what would you do?"

"I should get a respectable locksmith, and set him to work to pick the
lock for me."

"And your police, they would interfere, would they not?"

"Oh, no! not if they knew the man was properly employed."

"Then," he looked at me as keenly as he spoke, "all that is in doubt is
the conscience of the employer, and the belief of your policemen as to
whether or no that employer has a good conscience or a bad one. Your
police must indeed be zealous men and clever--oh, so clever!--in reading
the heart, that they trouble themselves in such matter. No, no, my
friend Jonathan, you go take the lock off a hundred empty house in this
your London, or of any city in the world; and if you do it as such
things are rightly done, and at the time such things are rightly done,
no one will interfere. I have read of a gentleman who owned a so fine
house in London, and when he went for months of summer to Switzerland
and lock up his house, some burglar came and broke window at back and
got in. Then he went and made open the shutters in front and walk out
and in through the door, before the very eyes of the police. Then he
have an auction in that house, and advertise it, and put up big notice;
and when the day come he sell off by a great auctioneer all the goods of
that other man who own them. Then he go to a builder, and he sell him
that house, making an agreement that he pull it down and take all away
within a certain time. And your police and other authority help him all
they can. And when that owner come back from his holiday in Switzerland
he find only an empty hole where his house had been. This was all done
_en règle_; and in our work we shall be _en règle_ too. We shall not go
so early that the policemen who have then little to think of, shall deem
it strange; but we shall go after ten o'clock, when there are many
about, and such things would be done were we indeed owners of the
house."

I could not but see how right he was and the terrible despair of Mina's
face became relaxed a thought; there was hope in such good counsel. Van
Helsing went on:--

"When once within that house we may find more clues; at any rate some of
us can remain there whilst the rest find the other places where there be
more earth-boxes--at Bermondsey and Mile End."

Lord Godalming stood up. "I can be of some use here," he said. "I shall
wire to my people to have horses and carriages where they will be most
convenient."

"Look here, old fellow," said Morris, "it is a capital idea to have all
ready in case we want to go horsebacking; but don't you think that one
of your snappy carriages with its heraldic adornments in a byway of
Walworth or Mile End would attract too much attention for our purposes?
It seems to me that we ought to take cabs when we go south or east; and
even leave them somewhere near the neighbourhood we are going to."

"Friend Quincey is right!" said the Professor. "His head is what you
call in plane with the horizon. It is a difficult thing that we go to
do, and we do not want no peoples to watch us if so it may."

Mina took a growing interest in everything and I was rejoiced to see
that the exigency of affairs was helping her to forget for a time the
terrible experience of the night. She was very, very pale--almost
ghastly, and so thin that her lips were drawn away, showing her teeth in
somewhat of prominence. I did not mention this last, lest it should give
her needless pain; but it made my blood run cold in my veins to think of
what had occurred with poor Lucy when the Count had sucked her blood. As
yet there was no sign of the teeth growing sharper; but the time as yet
was short, and there was time for fear.

When we came to the discussion of the sequence of our efforts and of the
disposition of our forces, there were new sources of doubt. It was
finally agreed that before starting for Piccadilly we should destroy the
Count's lair close at hand. In case he should find it out too soon, we
should thus be still ahead of him in our work of destruction; and his
presence in his purely material shape, and at his weakest, might give us
some new clue.

As to the disposal of forces, it was suggested by the Professor that,
after our visit to Carfax, we should all enter the house in Piccadilly;
that the two doctors and I should remain there, whilst Lord Godalming
and Quincey found the lairs at Walworth and Mile End and destroyed them.
It was possible, if not likely, the Professor urged, that the Count
might appear in Piccadilly during the day, and that if so we might be
able to cope with him then and there. At any rate, we might be able to
follow him in force. To this plan I strenuously objected, and so far as
my going was concerned, for I said that I intended to stay and protect
Mina, I thought that my mind was made up on the subject; but Mina would
not listen to my objection. She said that there might be some law matter
in which I could be useful; that amongst the Count's papers might be
some clue which I could understand out of my experience in Transylvania;
and that, as it was, all the strength we could muster was required to
cope with the Count's extraordinary power. I had to give in, for Mina's
resolution was fixed; she said that it was the last hope for _her_ that
we should all work together. "As for me," she said, "I have no fear.
Things have been as bad as they can be; and whatever may happen must
have in it some element of hope or comfort. Go, my husband! God can, if
He wishes it, guard me as well alone as with any one present." So I
started up crying out: "Then in God's name let us come at once, for we
are losing time. The Count may come to Piccadilly earlier than we
think."

"Not so!" said Van Helsing, holding up his hand.

"But why?" I asked.

"Do you forget," he said, with actually a smile, "that last night he
banqueted heavily, and will sleep late?"

Did I forget! shall I ever--can I ever! Can any of us ever forget that
terrible scene! Mina struggled hard to keep her brave countenance; but
the pain overmastered her and she put her hands before her face, and
shuddered whilst she moaned. Van Helsing had not intended to recall her
frightful experience. He had simply lost sight of her and her part in
the affair in his intellectual effort. When it struck him what he said,
he was horrified at his thoughtlessness and tried to comfort her. "Oh,
Madam Mina," he said, "dear, dear Madam Mina, alas! that I of all who so
reverence you should have said anything so forgetful. These stupid old
lips of mine and this stupid old head do not deserve so; but you will
forget it, will you not?" He bent low beside her as he spoke; she took
his hand, and looking at him through her tears, said hoarsely:--

"No, I shall not forget, for it is well that I remember; and with it I
have so much in memory of you that is sweet, that I take it all
together. Now, you must all be going soon. Breakfast is ready, and we
must all eat that we may be strong."

Breakfast was a strange meal to us all. We tried to be cheerful and
encourage each other, and Mina was the brightest and most cheerful of
us. When it was over, Van Helsing stood up and said:--

"Now, my dear friends, we go forth to our terrible enterprise. Are we
all armed, as we were on that night when first we visited our enemy's
lair; armed against ghostly as well as carnal attack?" We all assured
him. "Then it is well. Now, Madam Mina, you are in any case _quite_ safe
here until the sunset; and before then we shall return--if---- We shall
return! But before we go let me see you armed against personal attack. I
have myself, since you came down, prepared your chamber by the placing
of things of which we know, so that He may not enter. Now let me guard
yourself. On your forehead I touch this piece of Sacred Wafer in the
name of the Father, the Son, and----"

There was a fearful scream which almost froze our hearts to hear. As he
had placed the Wafer on Mina's forehead, it had seared it--had burned
into the flesh as though it had been a piece of white-hot metal. My poor
darling's brain had told her the significance of the fact as quickly as
her nerves received the pain of it; and the two so overwhelmed her that
her overwrought nature had its voice in that dreadful scream. But the
words to her thought came quickly; the echo of the scream had not ceased
to ring on the air when there came the reaction, and she sank on her
knees on the floor in an agony of abasement. Pulling her beautiful hair
over her face, as the leper of old his mantle, she wailed out:--

"Unclean! Unclean! Even the Almighty shuns my polluted flesh! I must
bear this mark of shame upon my forehead until the Judgment Day." They
all paused. I had thrown myself beside her in an agony of helpless
grief, and putting my arms around held her tight. For a few minutes our
sorrowful hearts beat together, whilst the friends around us turned away
their eyes that ran tears silently. Then Van Helsing turned and said
gravely; so gravely that I could not help feeling that he was in some
way inspired, and was stating things outside himself:--

"It may be that you may have to bear that mark till God himself see fit,
as He most surely shall, on the Judgment Day, to redress all wrongs of
the earth and of His children that He has placed thereon. And oh, Madam
Mina, my dear, my dear, may we who love you be there to see, when that
red scar, the sign of God's knowledge of what has been, shall pass away,
and leave your forehead as pure as the heart we know. For so surely as
we live, that scar shall pass away when God sees right to lift the
burden that is hard upon us. Till then we bear our Cross, as His Son did
in obedience to His Will. It may be that we are chosen instruments of
His good pleasure, and that we ascend to His bidding as that other
through stripes and shame; through tears and blood; through doubts and
fears, and all that makes the difference between God and man."

There was hope in his words, and comfort; and they made for resignation.
Mina and I both felt so, and simultaneously we each took one of the old
man's hands and bent over and kissed it. Then without a word we all
knelt down together, and, all holding hands, swore to be true to each
other. We men pledged ourselves to raise the veil of sorrow from the
head of her whom, each in his own way, we loved; and we prayed for help
and guidance in the terrible task which lay before us.

It was then time to start. So I said farewell to Mina, a parting which
neither of us shall forget to our dying day; and we set out.

To one thing I have made up my mind: if we find out that Mina must be a
vampire in the end, then she shall not go into that unknown and terrible
land alone. I suppose it is thus that in old times one vampire meant
many; just as their hideous bodies could only rest in sacred earth, so
the holiest love was the recruiting sergeant for their ghastly ranks.

We entered Carfax without trouble and found all things the same as on
the first occasion. It was hard to believe that amongst so prosaic
surroundings of neglect and dust and decay there was any ground for such
fear as already we knew. Had not our minds been made up, and had there
not been terrible memories to spur us on, we could hardly have proceeded
with our task. We found no papers, or any sign of use in the house; and
in the old chapel the great boxes looked just as we had seen them last.
Dr. Van Helsing said to us solemnly as we stood before them:--

"And now, my friends, we have a duty here to do. We must sterilise this
earth, so sacred of holy memories, that he has brought from a far
distant land for such fell use. He has chosen this earth because it has
been holy. Thus we defeat him with his own weapon, for we make it more
holy still. It was sanctified to such use of man, now we sanctify it to
God." As he spoke he took from his bag a screwdriver and a wrench, and
very soon the top of one of the cases was thrown open. The earth smelled
musty and close; but we did not somehow seem to mind, for our attention
was concentrated on the Professor. Taking from his box a piece of the
Sacred Wafer he laid it reverently on the earth, and then shutting down
the lid began to screw it home, we aiding him as he worked.

One by one we treated in the same way each of the great boxes, and left
them as we had found them to all appearance; but in each was a portion
of the Host.

When we closed the door behind us, the Professor said solemnly:--

"So much is already done. If it may be that with all the others we can
be so successful, then the sunset of this evening may shine on Madam
Mina's forehead all white as ivory and with no stain!"

As we passed across the lawn on our way to the station to catch our
train we could see the front of the asylum. I looked eagerly, and in the
window of my own room saw Mina. I waved my hand to her, and nodded to
tell that our work there was successfully accomplished. She nodded in
reply to show that she understood. The last I saw, she was waving her
hand in farewell. It was with a heavy heart that we sought the station
and just caught the train, which was steaming in as we reached the
platform.

I have written this in the train.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Piccadilly, 12:30 o'clock._--Just before we reached Fenchurch Street
Lord Godalming said to me:--

"Quincey and I will find a locksmith. You had better not come with us in
case there should be any difficulty; for under the circumstances it
wouldn't seem so bad for us to break into an empty house. But you are a
solicitor and the Incorporated Law Society might tell you that you
should have known better." I demurred as to my not sharing any danger
even of odium, but he went on: "Besides, it will attract less attention
if there are not too many of us. My title will make it all right with
the locksmith, and with any policeman that may come along. You had
better go with Jack and the Professor and stay in the Green Park,
somewhere in sight of the house; and when you see the door opened and
the smith has gone away, do you all come across. We shall be on the
lookout for you, and shall let you in."

"The advice is good!" said Van Helsing, so we said no more. Godalming
and Morris hurried off in a cab, we following in another. At the corner
of Arlington Street our contingent got out and strolled into the Green
Park. My heart beat as I saw the house on which so much of our hope was
centred, looming up grim and silent in its deserted condition amongst
its more lively and spruce-looking neighbours. We sat down on a bench
within good view, and began to smoke cigars so as to attract as little
attention as possible. The minutes seemed to pass with leaden feet as we
waited for the coming of the others.

At length we saw a four-wheeler drive up. Out of it, in leisurely
fashion, got Lord Godalming and Morris; and down from the box descended
a thick-set working man with his rush-woven basket of tools. Morris paid
the cabman, who touched his hat and drove away. Together the two
ascended the steps, and Lord Godalming pointed out what he wanted done.
The workman took off his coat leisurely and hung it on one of the spikes
of the rail, saying something to a policeman who just then sauntered
along. The policeman nodded acquiescence, and the man kneeling down
placed his bag beside him. After searching through it, he took out a
selection of tools which he produced to lay beside him in orderly
fashion. Then he stood up, looked into the keyhole, blew into it, and
turning to his employers, made some remark. Lord Godalming smiled, and
the man lifted a good-sized bunch of keys; selecting one of them, he
began to probe the lock, as if feeling his way with it. After fumbling
about for a bit he tried a second, and then a third. All at once the
door opened under a slight push from him, and he and the two others
entered the hall. We sat still; my own cigar burnt furiously, but Van
Helsing's went cold altogether. We waited patiently as we saw the
workman come out and bring in his bag. Then he held the door partly
open, steadying it with his knees, whilst he fitted a key to the lock.
This he finally handed to Lord Godalming, who took out his purse and
gave him something. The man touched his hat, took his bag, put on his
coat and departed; not a soul took the slightest notice of the whole
transaction.

When the man had fairly gone, we three crossed the street and knocked at
the door. It was immediately opened by Quincey Morris, beside whom stood
Lord Godalming lighting a cigar.

"The place smells so vilely," said the latter as we came in. It did
indeed smell vilely--like the old chapel at Carfax--and with our
previous experience it was plain to us that the Count had been using the
place pretty freely. We moved to explore the house, all keeping together
in case of attack; for we knew we had a strong and wily enemy to deal
with, and as yet we did not know whether the Count might not be in the
house. In the dining-room, which lay at the back of the hall, we found
eight boxes of earth. Eight boxes only out of the nine, which we sought!
Our work was not over, and would never be until we should have found the
missing box. First we opened the shutters of the window which looked out
across a narrow stone-flagged yard at the blank face of a stable,
pointed to look like the front of a miniature house. There were no
windows in it, so we were not afraid of being over-looked. We did not
lose any time in examining the chests. With the tools which we had
brought with us we opened them, one by one, and treated them as we had
treated those others in the old chapel. It was evident to us that the
Count was not at present in the house, and we proceeded to search for
any of his effects.

After a cursory glance at the rest of the rooms, from basement to attic,
we came to the conclusion that the dining-room contained any effects
which might belong to the Count; and so we proceeded to minutely examine
them. They lay in a sort of orderly disorder on the great dining-room
table. There were title deeds of the Piccadilly house in a great bundle;
deeds of the purchase of the houses at Mile End and Bermondsey;
note-paper, envelopes, and pens and ink. All were covered up in thin
wrapping paper to keep them from the dust. There were also a clothes
brush, a brush and comb, and a jug and basin--the latter containing
dirty water which was reddened as if with blood. Last of all was a
little heap of keys of all sorts and sizes, probably those belonging to
the other houses. When we had examined this last find, Lord Godalming
and Quincey Morris taking accurate notes of the various addresses of the
houses in the East and the South, took with them the keys in a great
bunch, and set out to destroy the boxes in these places. The rest of us
are, with what patience we can, waiting their return--or the coming of
the Count.




CHAPTER XXIII

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


_3 October._--The time seemed terrible long whilst we were waiting for
the coming of Godalming and Quincey Morris. The Professor tried to keep
our minds active by using them all the time. I could see his beneficent
purpose, by the side glances which he threw from time to time at Harker.
The poor fellow is overwhelmed in a misery that is appalling to see.
Last night he was a frank, happy-looking man, with strong, youthful
face, full of energy, and with dark brown hair. To-day he is a drawn,
haggard old man, whose white hair matches well with the hollow burning
eyes and grief-written lines of his face. His energy is still intact; in
fact, he is like a living flame. This may yet be his salvation, for, if
all go well, it will tide him over the despairing period; he will then,
in a kind of way, wake again to the realities of life. Poor fellow, I
thought my own trouble was bad enough, but his----! The Professor knows
this well enough, and is doing his best to keep his mind active. What he
has been saying was, under the circumstances, of absorbing interest. So
well as I can remember, here it is:--

"I have studied, over and over again since they came into my hands, all
the papers relating to this monster; and the more I have studied, the
greater seems the necessity to utterly stamp him out. All through there
are signs of his advance; not only of his power, but of his knowledge of
it. As I learned from the researches of my friend Arminus of Buda-Pesth,
he was in life a most wonderful man. Soldier, statesman, and
alchemist--which latter was the highest development of the
science-knowledge of his time. He had a mighty brain, a learning beyond
compare, and a heart that knew no fear and no remorse. He dared even to
attend the Scholomance, and there was no branch of knowledge of his time
that he did not essay. Well, in him the brain powers survived the
physical death; though it would seem that memory was not all complete.
In some faculties of mind he has been, and is, only a child; but he is
growing, and some things that were childish at the first are now of
man's stature. He is experimenting, and doing it well; and if it had not
been that we have crossed his path he would be yet--he may be yet if we
fail--the father or furtherer of a new order of beings, whose road must
lead through Death, not Life."

Harker groaned and said, "And this is all arrayed against my darling!
But how is he experimenting? The knowledge may help us to defeat him!"

"He has all along, since his coming, been trying his power, slowly but
surely; that big child-brain of his is working. Well for us, it is, as
yet, a child-brain; for had he dared, at the first, to attempt certain
things he would long ago have been beyond our power. However, he means
to succeed, and a man who has centuries before him can afford to wait
and to go slow. _Festina lente_ may well be his motto."

"I fail to understand," said Harker wearily. "Oh, do be more plain to
me! Perhaps grief and trouble are dulling my brain."

The Professor laid his hand tenderly on his shoulder as he spoke:--

"Ah, my child, I will be plain. Do you not see how, of late, this
monster has been creeping into knowledge experimentally. How he has been
making use of the zoöphagous patient to effect his entry into friend
John's home; for your Vampire, though in all afterwards he can come when
and how he will, must at the first make entry only when asked thereto by
an inmate. But these are not his most important experiments. Do we not
see how at the first all these so great boxes were moved by others. He
knew not then but that must be so. But all the time that so great
child-brain of his was growing, and he began to consider whether he
might not himself move the box. So he began to help; and then, when he
found that this be all-right, he try to move them all alone. And so he
progress, and he scatter these graves of him; and none but he know where
they are hidden. He may have intend to bury them deep in the ground. So
that he only use them in the night, or at such time as he can change his
form, they do him equal well; and none may know these are his
hiding-place! But, my child, do not despair; this knowledge come to him
just too late! Already all of his lairs but one be sterilise as for him;
and before the sunset this shall be so. Then he have no place where he
can move and hide. I delayed this morning that so we might be sure. Is
there not more at stake for us than for him? Then why we not be even
more careful than him? By my clock it is one hour and already, if all be
well, friend Arthur and Quincey are on their way to us. To-day is our
day, and we must go sure, if slow, and lose no chance. See! there are
five of us when those absent ones return."

Whilst he was speaking we were startled by a knock at the hall door, the
double postman's knock of the telegraph boy. We all moved out to the
hall with one impulse, and Van Helsing, holding up his hand to us to
keep silence, stepped to the door and opened it. The boy handed in a
despatch. The Professor closed the door again, and, after looking at the
direction, opened it and read aloud.

"Look out for D. He has just now, 12:45, come from Carfax hurriedly and
hastened towards the South. He seems to be going the round and may want
to see you: Mina."

There was a pause, broken by Jonathan Harker's voice:--

"Now, God be thanked, we shall soon meet!" Van Helsing turned to him
quickly and said:--

"God will act in His own way and time. Do not fear, and do not rejoice
as yet; for what we wish for at the moment may be our undoings."

"I care for nothing now," he answered hotly, "except to wipe out this
brute from the face of creation. I would sell my soul to do it!"

"Oh, hush, hush, my child!" said Van Helsing. "God does not purchase
souls in this wise; and the Devil, though he may purchase, does not keep
faith. But God is merciful and just, and knows your pain and your
devotion to that dear Madam Mina. Think you, how her pain would be
doubled, did she but hear your wild words. Do not fear any of us, we are
all devoted to this cause, and to-day shall see the end. The time is
coming for action; to-day this Vampire is limit to the powers of man,
and till sunset he may not change. It will take him time to arrive
here--see, it is twenty minutes past one--and there are yet some times
before he can hither come, be he never so quick. What we must hope for
is that my Lord Arthur and Quincey arrive first."

About half an hour after we had received Mrs. Harker's telegram, there
came a quiet, resolute knock at the hall door. It was just an ordinary
knock, such as is given hourly by thousands of gentlemen, but it made
the Professor's heart and mine beat loudly. We looked at each other, and
together moved out into the hall; we each held ready to use our various
armaments--the spiritual in the left hand, the mortal in the right. Van
Helsing pulled back the latch, and, holding the door half open, stood
back, having both hands ready for action. The gladness of our hearts
must have shown upon our faces when on the step, close to the door, we
saw Lord Godalming and Quincey Morris. They came quickly in and closed
the door behind them, the former saying, as they moved along the
hall:--

"It is all right. We found both places; six boxes in each and we
destroyed them all!"

"Destroyed?" asked the Professor.

"For him!" We were silent for a minute, and then Quincey said:--

"There's nothing to do but to wait here. If, however, he doesn't turn up
by five o'clock, we must start off; for it won't do to leave Mrs. Harker
alone after sunset."

"He will be here before long now," said Van Helsing, who had been
consulting his pocket-book. "_Nota bene_, in Madam's telegram he went
south from Carfax, that means he went to cross the river, and he could
only do so at slack of tide, which should be something before one
o'clock. That he went south has a meaning for us. He is as yet only
suspicious; and he went from Carfax first to the place where he would
suspect interference least. You must have been at Bermondsey only a
short time before him. That he is not here already shows that he went to
Mile End next. This took him some time; for he would then have to be
carried over the river in some way. Believe me, my friends, we shall not
have long to wait now. We should have ready some plan of attack, so that
we may throw away no chance. Hush, there is no time now. Have all your
arms! Be ready!" He held up a warning hand as he spoke, for we all could
hear a key softly inserted in the lock of the hall door.

I could not but admire, even at such a moment, the way in which a
dominant spirit asserted itself. In all our hunting parties and
adventures in different parts of the world, Quincey Morris had always
been the one to arrange the plan of action, and Arthur and I had been
accustomed to obey him implicitly. Now, the old habit seemed to be
renewed instinctively. With a swift glance around the room, he at once
laid out our plan of attack, and, without speaking a word, with a
gesture, placed us each in position. Van Helsing, Harker, and I were
just behind the door, so that when it was opened the Professor could
guard it whilst we two stepped between the incomer and the door.
Godalming behind and Quincey in front stood just out of sight ready to
move in front of the window. We waited in a suspense that made the
seconds pass with nightmare slowness. The slow, careful steps came along
the hall; the Count was evidently prepared for some surprise--at least
he feared it.

Suddenly with a single bound he leaped into the room, winning a way past
us before any of us could raise a hand to stay him. There was something
so panther-like in the movement--something so unhuman, that it seemed
to sober us all from the shock of his coming. The first to act was
Harker, who, with a quick movement, threw himself before the door
leading into the room in the front of the house. As the Count saw us, a
horrible sort of snarl passed over his face, showing the eye-teeth long
and pointed; but the evil smile as quickly passed into a cold stare of
lion-like disdain. His expression again changed as, with a single
impulse, we all advanced upon him. It was a pity that we had not some
better organised plan of attack, for even at the moment I wondered what
we were to do. I did not myself know whether our lethal weapons would
avail us anything. Harker evidently meant to try the matter, for he had
ready his great Kukri knife and made a fierce and sudden cut at him. The
blow was a powerful one; only the diabolical quickness of the Count's
leap back saved him. A second less and the trenchant blade had shorne
through his heart. As it was, the point just cut the cloth of his coat,
making a wide gap whence a bundle of bank-notes and a stream of gold
fell out. The expression of the Count's face was so hellish, that for a
moment I feared for Harker, though I saw him throw the terrible knife
aloft again for another stroke. Instinctively I moved forward with a
protective impulse, holding the Crucifix and Wafer in my left hand. I
felt a mighty power fly along my arm; and it was without surprise that I
saw the monster cower back before a similar movement made spontaneously
by each one of us. It would be impossible to describe the expression of
hate and baffled malignity--of anger and hellish rage--which came over
the Count's face. His waxen hue became greenish-yellow by the contrast
of his burning eyes, and the red scar on the forehead showed on the
pallid skin like a palpitating wound. The next instant, with a sinuous
dive he swept under Harker's arm, ere his blow could fall, and, grasping
a handful of the money from the floor, dashed across the room, threw
himself at the window. Amid the crash and glitter of the falling glass,
he tumbled into the flagged area below. Through the sound of the
shivering glass I could hear the "ting" of the gold, as some of the
sovereigns fell on the flagging.

We ran over and saw him spring unhurt from the ground. He, rushing up
the steps, crossed the flagged yard, and pushed open the stable door.
There he turned and spoke to us:--

"You think to baffle me, you--with your pale faces all in a row, like
sheep in a butcher's. You shall be sorry yet, each one of you! You think
you have left me without a place to rest; but I have more. My revenge is
just begun! I spread it over centuries, and time is on my side. Your
girls that you all love are mine already; and through them you and
others shall yet be mine--my creatures, to do my bidding and to be my
jackals when I want to feed. Bah!" With a contemptuous sneer, he passed
quickly through the door, and we heard the rusty bolt creak as he
fastened it behind him. A door beyond opened and shut. The first of us
to speak was the Professor, as, realising the difficulty of following
him through the stable, we moved toward the hall.

"We have learnt something--much! Notwithstanding his brave words, he
fears us; he fear time, he fear want! For if not, why he hurry so? His
very tone betray him, or my ears deceive. Why take that money? You
follow quick. You are hunters of wild beast, and understand it so. For
me, I make sure that nothing here may be of use to him, if so that he
return." As he spoke he put the money remaining into his pocket; took
the title-deeds in the bundle as Harker had left them, and swept the
remaining things into the open fireplace, where he set fire to them with
a match.

Godalming and Morris had rushed out into the yard, and Harker had
lowered himself from the window to follow the Count. He had, however,
bolted the stable door; and by the time they had forced it open there
was no sign of him. Van Helsing and I tried to make inquiry at the back
of the house; but the mews was deserted and no one had seen him depart.

It was now late in the afternoon, and sunset was not far off. We had to
recognise that our game was up; with heavy hearts we agreed with the
Professor when he said:--

"Let us go back to Madam Mina--poor, poor dear Madam Mina. All we can do
just now is done; and we can there, at least, protect her. But we need
not despair. There is but one more earth-box, and we must try to find
it; when that is done all may yet be well." I could see that he spoke as
bravely as he could to comfort Harker. The poor fellow was quite broken
down; now and again he gave a low groan which he could not suppress--he
was thinking of his wife.

With sad hearts we came back to my house, where we found Mrs. Harker
waiting us, with an appearance of cheerfulness which did honour to her
bravery and unselfishness. When she saw our faces, her own became as
pale as death: for a second or two her eyes were closed as if she were
in secret prayer; and then she said cheerfully:--

"I can never thank you all enough. Oh, my poor darling!" As she spoke,
she took her husband's grey head in her hands and kissed it--"Lay your
poor head here and rest it. All will yet be well, dear! God will protect
us if He so will it in His good intent." The poor fellow groaned. There
was no place for words in his sublime misery.

We had a sort of perfunctory supper together, and I think it cheered us
all up somewhat. It was, perhaps, the mere animal heat of food to hungry
people--for none of us had eaten anything since breakfast--or the sense
of companionship may have helped us; but anyhow we were all less
miserable, and saw the morrow as not altogether without hope. True to
our promise, we told Mrs. Harker everything which had passed; and
although she grew snowy white at times when danger had seemed to
threaten her husband, and red at others when his devotion to her was
manifested, she listened bravely and with calmness. When we came to the
part where Harker had rushed at the Count so recklessly, she clung to
her husband's arm, and held it tight as though her clinging could
protect him from any harm that might come. She said nothing, however,
till the narration was all done, and matters had been brought right up
to the present time. Then without letting go her husband's hand she
stood up amongst us and spoke. Oh, that I could give any idea of the
scene; of that sweet, sweet, good, good woman in all the radiant beauty
of her youth and animation, with the red scar on her forehead, of which
she was conscious, and which we saw with grinding of our
teeth--remembering whence and how it came; her loving kindness against
our grim hate; her tender faith against all our fears and doubting; and
we, knowing that so far as symbols went, she with all her goodness and
purity and faith, was outcast from God.

"Jonathan," she said, and the word sounded like music on her lips it was
so full of love and tenderness, "Jonathan dear, and you all my true,
true friends, I want you to bear something in mind through all this
dreadful time. I know that you must fight--that you must destroy even as
you destroyed the false Lucy so that the true Lucy might live hereafter;
but it is not a work of hate. That poor soul who has wrought all this
misery is the saddest case of all. Just think what will be his joy when
he, too, is destroyed in his worser part that his better part may have
spiritual immortality. You must be pitiful to him, too, though it may
not hold your hands from his destruction."

As she spoke I could see her husband's face darken and draw together, as
though the passion in him were shrivelling his being to its core.
Instinctively the clasp on his wife's hand grew closer, till his
knuckles looked white. She did not flinch from the pain which I knew she
must have suffered, but looked at him with eyes that were more appealing
than ever. As she stopped speaking he leaped to his feet, almost tearing
his hand from hers as he spoke:--

"May God give him into my hand just for long enough to destroy that
earthly life of him which we are aiming at. If beyond it I could send
his soul for ever and ever to burning hell I would do it!"

"Oh, hush! oh, hush! in the name of the good God. Don't say such things,
Jonathan, my husband; or you will crush me with fear and horror. Just
think, my dear--I have been thinking all this long, long day of it--that
... perhaps ... some day ... I, too, may need such pity; and that some
other like you--and with equal cause for anger--may deny it to me! Oh,
my husband! my husband, indeed I would have spared you such a thought
had there been another way; but I pray that God may not have treasured
your wild words, except as the heart-broken wail of a very loving and
sorely stricken man. Oh, God, let these poor white hairs go in evidence
of what he has suffered, who all his life has done no wrong, and on whom
so many sorrows have come."

We men were all in tears now. There was no resisting them, and we wept
openly. She wept, too, to see that her sweeter counsels had prevailed.
Her husband flung himself on his knees beside her, and putting his arms
round her, hid his face in the folds of her dress. Van Helsing beckoned
to us and we stole out of the room, leaving the two loving hearts alone
with their God.

Before they retired the Professor fixed up the room against any coming
of the Vampire, and assured Mrs. Harker that she might rest in peace.
She tried to school herself to the belief, and, manifestly for her
husband's sake, tried to seem content. It was a brave struggle; and was,
I think and believe, not without its reward. Van Helsing had placed at
hand a bell which either of them was to sound in case of any emergency.
When they had retired, Quincey, Godalming, and I arranged that we should
sit up, dividing the night between us, and watch over the safety of the
poor stricken lady. The first watch falls to Quincey, so the rest of us
shall be off to bed as soon as we can. Godalming has already turned in,
for his is the second watch. Now that my work is done I, too, shall go
to bed.


_Jonathan Harker's Journal._

_3-4 October, close to midnight._--I thought yesterday would never end.
There was over me a yearning for sleep, in some sort of blind belief
that to wake would be to find things changed, and that any change must
now be for the better. Before we parted, we discussed what our next step
was to be, but we could arrive at no result. All we knew was that one
earth-box remained, and that the Count alone knew where it was. If he
chooses to lie hidden, he may baffle us for years; and in the
meantime!--the thought is too horrible, I dare not think of it even now.
This I know: that if ever there was a woman who was all perfection, that
one is my poor wronged darling. I love her a thousand times more for her
sweet pity of last night, a pity that made my own hate of the monster
seem despicable. Surely God will not permit the world to be the poorer
by the loss of such a creature. This is hope to me. We are all drifting
reefwards now, and faith is our only anchor. Thank God! Mina is
sleeping, and sleeping without dreams. I fear what her dreams might be
like, with such terrible memories to ground them in. She has not been so
calm, within my seeing, since the sunset. Then, for a while, there came
over her face a repose which was like spring after the blasts of March.
I thought at the time that it was the softness of the red sunset on her
face, but somehow now I think it has a deeper meaning. I am not sleepy
myself, though I am weary--weary to death. However, I must try to sleep;
for there is to-morrow to think of, and there is no rest for me
until....

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--I must have fallen asleep, for I was awaked by Mina, who was
sitting up in bed, with a startled look on her face. I could see easily,
for we did not leave the room in darkness; she had placed a warning hand
over my mouth, and now she whispered in my ear:--

"Hush! there is someone in the corridor!" I got up softly, and crossing
the room, gently opened the door.

Just outside, stretched on a mattress, lay Mr. Morris, wide awake. He
raised a warning hand for silence as he whispered to me:--

"Hush! go back to bed; it is all right. One of us will be here all
night. We don't mean to take any chances!"

His look and gesture forbade discussion, so I came back and told Mina.
She sighed and positively a shadow of a smile stole over her poor, pale
face as she put her arms round me and said softly:--

"Oh, thank God for good brave men!" With a sigh she sank back again to
sleep. I write this now as I am not sleepy, though I must try again.

       *       *       *       *       *

_4 October, morning._--Once again during the night I was wakened by
Mina. This time we had all had a good sleep, for the grey of the coming
dawn was making the windows into sharp oblongs, and the gas flame was
like a speck rather than a disc of light. She said to me hurriedly:--

"Go, call the Professor. I want to see him at once."

"Why?" I asked.

"I have an idea. I suppose it must have come in the night, and matured
without my knowing it. He must hypnotise me before the dawn, and then I
shall be able to speak. Go quick, dearest; the time is getting close." I
went to the door. Dr. Seward was resting on the mattress, and, seeing
me, he sprang to his feet.

"Is anything wrong?" he asked, in alarm.

"No," I replied; "but Mina wants to see Dr. Van Helsing at once."

"I will go," he said, and hurried into the Professor's room.

In two or three minutes later Van Helsing was in the room in his
dressing-gown, and Mr. Morris and Lord Godalming were with Dr. Seward at
the door asking questions. When the Professor saw Mina smile--a
positive smile ousted the anxiety of his face; he rubbed his hands as he
said:--

"Oh, my dear Madam Mina, this is indeed a change. See! friend Jonathan,
we have got our dear Madam Mina, as of old, back to us to-day!" Then
turning to her, he said, cheerfully: "And what am I do for you? For at
this hour you do not want me for nothings."

"I want you to hypnotise me!" she said. "Do it before the dawn, for I
feel that then I can speak, and speak freely. Be quick, for the time is
short!" Without a word he motioned her to sit up in bed.

Looking fixedly at her, he commenced to make passes in front of her,
from over the top of her head downward, with each hand in turn. Mina
gazed at him fixedly for a few minutes, during which my own heart beat
like a trip hammer, for I felt that some crisis was at hand. Gradually
her eyes closed, and she sat, stock still; only by the gentle heaving of
her bosom could one know that she was alive. The Professor made a few
more passes and then stopped, and I could see that his forehead was
covered with great beads of perspiration. Mina opened her eyes; but she
did not seem the same woman. There was a far-away look in her eyes, and
her voice had a sad dreaminess which was new to me. Raising his hand to
impose silence, the Professor motioned to me to bring the others in.
They came on tip-toe, closing the door behind them, and stood at the
foot of the bed, looking on. Mina appeared not to see them. The
stillness was broken by Van Helsing's voice speaking in a low level tone
which would not break the current of her thoughts:--

"Where are you?" The answer came in a neutral way:--

"I do not know. Sleep has no place it can call its own." For several
minutes there was silence. Mina sat rigid, and the Professor stood
staring at her fixedly; the rest of us hardly dared to breathe. The room
was growing lighter; without taking his eyes from Mina's face, Dr. Van
Helsing motioned me to pull up the blind. I did so, and the day seemed
just upon us. A red streak shot up, and a rosy light seemed to diffuse
itself through the room. On the instant the Professor spoke again:--

"Where are you now?" The answer came dreamily, but with intention; it
were as though she were interpreting something. I have heard her use the
same tone when reading her shorthand notes.

"I do not know. It is all strange to me!"

"What do you see?"

"I can see nothing; it is all dark."

"What do you hear?" I could detect the strain in the Professor's patient
voice.

"The lapping of water. It is gurgling by, and little waves leap. I can
hear them on the outside."

"Then you are on a ship?" We all looked at each other, trying to glean
something each from the other. We were afraid to think. The answer came
quick:--

"Oh, yes!"

"What else do you hear?"

"The sound of men stamping overhead as they run about. There is the
creaking of a chain, and the loud tinkle as the check of the capstan
falls into the rachet."

"What are you doing?"

"I am still--oh, so still. It is like death!" The voice faded away into
a deep breath as of one sleeping, and the open eyes closed again.

By this time the sun had risen, and we were all in the full light of
day. Dr. Van Helsing placed his hands on Mina's shoulders, and laid her
head down softly on her pillow. She lay like a sleeping child for a few
moments, and then, with a long sigh, awoke and stared in wonder to see
us all around her. "Have I been talking in my sleep?" was all she said.
She seemed, however, to know the situation without telling, though she
was eager to know what she had told. The Professor repeated the
conversation, and she said:--

"Then there is not a moment to lose: it may not be yet too late!" Mr.
Morris and Lord Godalming started for the door but the Professor's calm
voice called them back:--

"Stay, my friends. That ship, wherever it was, was weighing anchor
whilst she spoke. There are many ships weighing anchor at the moment in
your so great Port of London. Which of them is it that you seek? God be
thanked that we have once again a clue, though whither it may lead us we
know not. We have been blind somewhat; blind after the manner of men,
since when we can look back we see what we might have seen looking
forward if we had been able to see what we might have seen! Alas, but
that sentence is a puddle; is it not? We can know now what was in the
Count's mind, when he seize that money, though Jonathan's so fierce
knife put him in the danger that even he dread. He meant escape. Hear
me, ESCAPE! He saw that with but one earth-box left, and a pack of men
following like dogs after a fox, this London was no place for him. He
have take his last earth-box on board a ship, and he leave the land. He
think to escape, but no! we follow him. Tally Ho! as friend Arthur would
say when he put on his red frock! Our old fox is wily; oh! so wily, and
we must follow with wile. I, too, am wily and I think his mind in a
little while. In meantime we may rest and in peace, for there are waters
between us which he do not want to pass, and which he could not if he
would--unless the ship were to touch the land, and then only at full or
slack tide. See, and the sun is just rose, and all day to sunset is to
us. Let us take bath, and dress, and have breakfast which we all need,
and which we can eat comfortably since he be not in the same land with
us." Mina looked at him appealingly as she asked:--

"But why need we seek him further, when he is gone away from us?" He
took her hand and patted it as he replied:--

"Ask me nothings as yet. When we have breakfast, then I answer all
questions." He would say no more, and we separated to dress.

After breakfast Mina repeated her question. He looked at her gravely for
a minute and then said sorrowfully:--

"Because my dear, dear Madam Mina, now more than ever must we find him
even if we have to follow him to the jaws of Hell!" She grew paler as
she asked faintly:--

"Why?"

"Because," he answered solemnly, "he can live for centuries, and you are
but mortal woman. Time is now to be dreaded--since once he put that mark
upon your throat."

I was just in time to catch her as she fell forward in a faint.




CHAPTER XXIV

DR. SEWARD'S PHONOGRAPH DIARY, SPOKEN BY VAN HELSING


This to Jonathan Harker.

You are to stay with your dear Madam Mina. We shall go to make our
search--if I can call it so, for it is not search but knowing, and we
seek confirmation only. But do you stay and take care of her to-day.
This is your best and most holiest office. This day nothing can find him
here. Let me tell you that so you will know what we four know already,
for I have tell them. He, our enemy, have gone away; he have gone back
to his Castle in Transylvania. I know it so well, as if a great hand of
fire wrote it on the wall. He have prepare for this in some way, and
that last earth-box was ready to ship somewheres. For this he took the
money; for this he hurry at the last, lest we catch him before the sun
go down. It was his last hope, save that he might hide in the tomb that
he think poor Miss Lucy, being as he thought like him, keep open to him.
But there was not of time. When that fail he make straight for his last
resource--his last earth-work I might say did I wish _double entente_.
He is clever, oh, so clever! he know that his game here was finish; and
so he decide he go back home. He find ship going by the route he came,
and he go in it. We go off now to find what ship, and whither bound;
when we have discover that, we come back and tell you all. Then we will
comfort you and poor dear Madam Mina with new hope. For it will be hope
when you think it over: that all is not lost. This very creature that we
pursue, he take hundreds of years to get so far as London; and yet in
one day, when we know of the disposal of him we drive him out. He is
finite, though he is powerful to do much harm and suffers not as we do.
But we are strong, each in our purpose; and we are all more strong
together. Take heart afresh, dear husband of Madam Mina. This battle is
but begun, and in the end we shall win--so sure as that God sits on high
to watch over His children. Therefore be of much comfort till we return.

VAN HELSING.


_Jonathan Harker's Journal._

_4 October._--When I read to Mina, Van Helsing's message in the
phonograph, the poor girl brightened up considerably. Already the
certainty that the Count is out of the country has given her comfort;
and comfort is strength to her. For my own part, now that his horrible
danger is not face to face with us, it seems almost impossible to
believe in it. Even my own terrible experiences in Castle Dracula seem
like a long-forgotten dream. Here in the crisp autumn air in the bright
sunlight----

Alas! how can I disbelieve! In the midst of my thought my eye fell on
the red scar on my poor darling's white forehead. Whilst that lasts,
there can be no disbelief. And afterwards the very memory of it will
keep faith crystal clear. Mina and I fear to be idle, so we have been
over all the diaries again and again. Somehow, although the reality
seems greater each time, the pain and the fear seem less. There is
something of a guiding purpose manifest throughout, which is comforting.
Mina says that perhaps we are the instruments of ultimate good. It may
be! I shall try to think as she does. We have never spoken to each other
yet of the future. It is better to wait till we see the Professor and
the others after their investigations.

The day is running by more quickly than I ever thought a day could run
for me again. It is now three o'clock.


_Mina Harker's Journal._

_5 October, 5 p. m._--Our meeting for report. Present: Professor Van
Helsing, Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward, Mr. Quincey Morris, Jonathan
Harker, Mina Harker.

Dr. Van Helsing described what steps were taken during the day to
discover on what boat and whither bound Count Dracula made his escape:--

"As I knew that he wanted to get back to Transylvania, I felt sure that
he must go by the Danube mouth; or by somewhere in the Black Sea, since
by that way he come. It was a dreary blank that was before us. _Omne
ignotum pro magnifico_; and so with heavy hearts we start to find what
ships leave for the Black Sea last night. He was in sailing ship, since
Madam Mina tell of sails being set. These not so important as to go in
your list of the shipping in the _Times_, and so we go, by suggestion of
Lord Godalming, to your Lloyd's, where are note of all ships that sail,
however so small. There we find that only one Black-Sea-bound ship go
out with the tide. She is the _Czarina Catherine_, and she sail from
Doolittle's Wharf for Varna, and thence on to other parts and up the
Danube. 'Soh!' said I, 'this is the ship whereon is the Count.' So off
we go to Doolittle's Wharf, and there we find a man in an office of wood
so small that the man look bigger than the office. From him we inquire
of the goings of the _Czarina Catherine_. He swear much, and he red face
and loud of voice, but he good fellow all the same; and when Quincey
give him something from his pocket which crackle as he roll it up, and
put it in a so small bag which he have hid deep in his clothing, he
still better fellow and humble servant to us. He come with us, and ask
many men who are rough and hot; these be better fellows too when they
have been no more thirsty. They say much of blood and bloom, and of
others which I comprehend not, though I guess what they mean; but
nevertheless they tell us all things which we want to know.

"They make known to us among them, how last afternoon at about five
o'clock comes a man so hurry. A tall man, thin and pale, with high nose
and teeth so white, and eyes that seem to be burning. That he be all in
black, except that he have a hat of straw which suit not him or the
time. That he scatter his money in making quick inquiry as to what ship
sails for the Black Sea and for where. Some took him to the office and
then to the ship, where he will not go aboard but halt at shore end of
gang-plank, and ask that the captain come to him. The captain come, when
told that he will be pay well; and though he swear much at the first he
agree to term. Then the thin man go and some one tell him where horse
and cart can be hired. He go there and soon he come again, himself
driving cart on which a great box; this he himself lift down, though it
take several to put it on truck for the ship. He give much talk to
captain as to how and where his box is to be place; but the captain like
it not and swear at him in many tongues, and tell him that if he like he
can come and see where it shall be. But he say 'no'; that he come not
yet, for that he have much to do. Whereupon the captain tell him that he
had better be quick--with blood--for that his ship will leave the
place--of blood--before the turn of the tide--with blood. Then the thin
man smile and say that of course he must go when he think fit; but he
will be surprise if he go quite so soon. The captain swear again,
polyglot, and the thin man make him bow, and thank him, and say that he
will so far intrude on his kindness as to come aboard before the
sailing. Final the captain, more red than ever, and in more tongues tell
him that he doesn't want no Frenchmen--with bloom upon them and also
with blood--in his ship--with blood on her also. And so, after asking
where there might be close at hand a ship where he might purchase ship
forms, he departed.

"No one knew where he went 'or bloomin' well cared,' as they said, for
they had something else to think of--well with blood again; for it soon
became apparent to all that the _Czarina Catherine_ would not sail as
was expected. A thin mist began to creep up from the river, and it grew,
and grew; till soon a dense fog enveloped the ship and all around her.
The captain swore polyglot--very polyglot--polyglot with bloom and
blood; but he could do nothing. The water rose and rose; and he began to
fear that he would lose the tide altogether. He was in no friendly mood,
when just at full tide, the thin man came up the gang-plank again and
asked to see where his box had been stowed. Then the captain replied
that he wished that he and his box--old and with much bloom and
blood--were in hell. But the thin man did not be offend, and went down
with the mate and saw where it was place, and came up and stood awhile
on deck in fog. He must have come off by himself, for none notice him.
Indeed they thought not of him; for soon the fog begin to melt away, and
all was clear again. My friends of the thirst and the language that was
of bloom and blood laughed, as they told how the captain's swears
exceeded even his usual polyglot, and was more than ever full of
picturesque, when on questioning other mariners who were on movement up
and down on the river that hour, he found that few of them had seen any
of fog at all, except where it lay round the wharf. However, the ship
went out on the ebb tide; and was doubtless by morning far down the
river mouth. She was by then, when they told us, well out to sea.

"And so, my dear Madam Mina, it is that we have to rest for a time, for
our enemy is on the sea, with the fog at his command, on his way to the
Danube mouth. To sail a ship takes time, go she never so quick; and when
we start we go on land more quick, and we meet him there. Our best hope
is to come on him when in the box between sunrise and sunset; for then
he can make no struggle, and we may deal with him as we should. There
are days for us, in which we can make ready our plan. We know all about
where he go; for we have seen the owner of the ship, who have shown us
invoices and all papers that can be. The box we seek is to be landed in
Varna, and to be given to an agent, one Ristics who will there present
his credentials; and so our merchant friend will have done his part.
When he ask if there be any wrong, for that so, he can telegraph and
have inquiry made at Varna, we say 'no'; for what is to be done is not
for police or of the customs. It must be done by us alone and in our own
way."

When Dr. Van Helsing had done speaking, I asked him if he were certain
that the Count had remained on board the ship. He replied: "We have the
best proof of that: your own evidence, when in the hypnotic trance this
morning." I asked him again if it were really necessary that they should
pursue the Count, for oh! I dread Jonathan leaving me, and I know that
he would surely go if the others went. He answered in growing passion,
at first quietly. As he went on, however, he grew more angry and more
forceful, till in the end we could not but see wherein was at least some
of that personal dominance which made him so long a master amongst
men:--

"Yes, it is necessary--necessary--necessary! For your sake in the first,
and then for the sake of humanity. This monster has done much harm
already, in the narrow scope where he find himself, and in the short
time when as yet he was only as a body groping his so small measure in
darkness and not knowing. All this have I told these others; you, my
dear Madam Mina, will learn it in the phonograph of my friend John, or
in that of your husband. I have told them how the measure of leaving his
own barren land--barren of peoples--and coming to a new land where life
of man teems till they are like the multitude of standing corn, was the
work of centuries. Were another of the Un-Dead, like him, to try to do
what he has done, perhaps not all the centuries of the world that have
been, or that will be, could aid him. With this one, all the forces of
nature that are occult and deep and strong must have worked together in
some wondrous way. The very place, where he have been alive, Un-Dead for
all these centuries, is full of strangeness of the geologic and chemical
world. There are deep caverns and fissures that reach none know whither.
There have been volcanoes, some of whose openings still send out waters
of strange properties, and gases that kill or make to vivify. Doubtless,
there is something magnetic or electric in some of these combinations of
occult forces which work for physical life in strange way; and in
himself were from the first some great qualities. In a hard and warlike
time he was celebrate that he have more iron nerve, more subtle brain,
more braver heart, than any man. In him some vital principle have in
strange way found their utmost; and as his body keep strong and grow and
thrive, so his brain grow too. All this without that diabolic aid which
is surely to him; for it have to yield to the powers that come from,
and are, symbolic of good. And now this is what he is to us. He have
infect you--oh, forgive me, my dear, that I must say such; but it is for
good of you that I speak. He infect you in such wise, that even if he do
no more, you have only to live--to live in your own old, sweet way; and
so in time, death, which is of man's common lot and with God's sanction,
shall make you like to him. This must not be! We have sworn together
that it must not. Thus are we ministers of God's own wish: that the
world, and men for whom His Son die, will not be given over to monsters,
whose very existence would defame Him. He have allowed us to redeem one
soul already, and we go out as the old knights of the Cross to redeem
more. Like them we shall travel towards the sunrise; and like them, if
we fall, we fall in good cause." He paused and I said:--

"But will not the Count take his rebuff wisely? Since he has been driven
from England, will he not avoid it, as a tiger does the village from
which he has been hunted?"

"Aha!" he said, "your simile of the tiger good, for me, and I shall
adopt him. Your man-eater, as they of India call the tiger who has once
tasted blood of the human, care no more for the other prey, but prowl
unceasing till he get him. This that we hunt from our village is a
tiger, too, a man-eater, and he never cease to prowl. Nay, in himself he
is not one to retire and stay afar. In his life, his living life, he go
over the Turkey frontier and attack his enemy on his own ground; he be
beaten back, but did he stay? No! He come again, and again, and again.
Look at his persistence and endurance. With the child-brain that was to
him he have long since conceive the idea of coming to a great city. What
does he do? He find out the place of all the world most of promise for
him. Then he deliberately set himself down to prepare for the task. He
find in patience just how is his strength, and what are his powers. He
study new tongues. He learn new social life; new environment of old
ways, the politic, the law, the finance, the science, the habit of a new
land and a new people who have come to be since he was. His glimpse that
he have had, whet his appetite only and enkeen his desire. Nay, it help
him to grow as to his brain; for it all prove to him how right he was at
the first in his surmises. He have done this alone; all alone! from a
ruin tomb in a forgotten land. What more may he not do when the greater
world of thought is open to him. He that can smile at death, as we know
him; who can flourish in the midst of diseases that kill off whole
peoples. Oh, if such an one was to come from God, and not the Devil,
what a force for good might he not be in this old world of ours. But we
are pledged to set the world free. Our toil must be in silence, and our
efforts all in secret; for in this enlightened age, when men believe not
even what they see, the doubting of wise men would be his greatest
strength. It would be at once his sheath and his armour, and his weapons
to destroy us, his enemies, who are willing to peril even our own souls
for the safety of one we love--for the good of mankind, and for the
honour and glory of God."

After a general discussion it was determined that for to-night nothing
be definitely settled; that we should all sleep on the facts, and try to
think out the proper conclusions. To-morrow, at breakfast, we are to
meet again, and, after making our conclusions known to one another, we
shall decide on some definite cause of action.

       *       *       *       *       *

I feel a wonderful peace and rest to-night. It is as if some haunting
presence were removed from me. Perhaps ...

My surmise was not finished, could not be; for I caught sight in the
mirror of the red mark upon my forehead; and I knew that I was still
unclean.


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_5 October._--We all rose early, and I think that sleep did much for
each and all of us. When we met at early breakfast there was more
general cheerfulness than any of us had ever expected to experience
again.

It is really wonderful how much resilience there is in human nature. Let
any obstructing cause, no matter what, be removed in any way--even by
death--and we fly back to first principles of hope and enjoyment. More
than once as we sat around the table, my eyes opened in wonder whether
the whole of the past days had not been a dream. It was only when I
caught sight of the red blotch on Mrs. Harker's forehead that I was
brought back to reality. Even now, when I am gravely revolving the
matter, it is almost impossible to realise that the cause of all our
trouble is still existent. Even Mrs. Harker seems to lose sight of her
trouble for whole spells; it is only now and again, when something
recalls it to her mind, that she thinks of her terrible scar. We are to
meet here in my study in half an hour and decide on our course of
action. I see only one immediate difficulty, I know it by instinct
rather than reason: we shall all have to speak frankly; and yet I fear
that in some mysterious way poor Mrs. Harker's tongue is tied. I _know_
that she forms conclusions of her own, and from all that has been I can
guess how brilliant and how true they must be; but she will not, or
cannot, give them utterance. I have mentioned this to Van Helsing, and
he and I are to talk it over when we are alone. I suppose it is some of
that horrid poison which has got into her veins beginning to work. The
Count had his own purposes when he gave her what Van Helsing called "the
Vampire's baptism of blood." Well, there may be a poison that distils
itself out of good things; in an age when the existence of ptomaines is
a mystery we should not wonder at anything! One thing I know: that if my
instinct be true regarding poor Mrs. Harker's silences, then there is a
terrible difficulty--an unknown danger--in the work before us. The same
power that compels her silence may compel her speech. I dare not think
further; for so I should in my thoughts dishonour a noble woman!

Van Helsing is coming to my study a little before the others. I shall
try to open the subject with him.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--When the Professor came in, we talked over the state of
things. I could see that he had something on his mind which he wanted to
say, but felt some hesitancy about broaching the subject. After beating
about the bush a little, he said suddenly:--

"Friend John, there is something that you and I must talk of alone, just
at the first at any rate. Later, we may have to take the others into our
confidence"; then he stopped, so I waited; he went on:--

"Madam Mina, our poor, dear Madam Mina is changing." A cold shiver ran
through me to find my worst fears thus endorsed. Van Helsing
continued:--

"With the sad experience of Miss Lucy, we must this time be warned
before things go too far. Our task is now in reality more difficult than
ever, and this new trouble makes every hour of the direst importance. I
can see the characteristics of the vampire coming in her face. It is now
but very, very slight; but it is to be seen if we have eyes to notice
without to prejudge. Her teeth are some sharper, and at times her eyes
are more hard. But these are not all, there is to her the silence now
often; as so it was with Miss Lucy. She did not speak, even when she
wrote that which she wished to be known later. Now my fear is this. If
it be that she can, by our hypnotic trance, tell what the Count see and
hear, is it not more true that he who have hypnotise her first, and who
have drink of her very blood and make her drink of his, should, if he
will, compel her mind to disclose to him that which she know?" I nodded
acquiescence; he went on:--

"Then, what we must do is to prevent this; we must keep her ignorant of
our intent, and so she cannot tell what she know not. This is a painful
task! Oh, so painful that it heart-break me to think of; but it must be.
When to-day we meet, I must tell her that for reason which we will not
to speak she must not more be of our council, but be simply guarded by
us." He wiped his forehead, which had broken out in profuse perspiration
at the thought of the pain which he might have to inflict upon the poor
soul already so tortured. I knew that it would be some sort of comfort
to him if I told him that I also had come to the same conclusion; for at
any rate it would take away the pain of doubt. I told him, and the
effect was as I expected.

It is now close to the time of our general gathering. Van Helsing has
gone away to prepare for the meeting, and his painful part of it. I
really believe his purpose is to be able to pray alone.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--At the very outset of our meeting a great personal relief was
experienced by both Van Helsing and myself. Mrs. Harker had sent a
message by her husband to say that she would not join us at present, as
she thought it better that we should be free to discuss our movements
without her presence to embarrass us. The Professor and I looked at each
other for an instant, and somehow we both seemed relieved. For my own
part, I thought that if Mrs. Harker realised the danger herself, it was
much pain as well as much danger averted. Under the circumstances we
agreed, by a questioning look and answer, with finger on lip, to
preserve silence in our suspicions, until we should have been able to
confer alone again. We went at once into our Plan of Campaign. Van
Helsing roughly put the facts before us first:--

"The _Czarina Catherine_ left the Thames yesterday morning. It will take
her at the quickest speed she has ever made at least three weeks to
reach Varna; but we can travel overland to the same place in three days.
Now, if we allow for two days less for the ship's voyage, owing to such
weather influences as we know that the Count can bring to bear; and if
we allow a whole day and night for any delays which may occur to us,
then we have a margin of nearly two weeks. Thus, in order to be quite
safe, we must leave here on 17th at latest. Then we shall at any rate
be in Varna a day before the ship arrives, and able to make such
preparations as may be necessary. Of course we shall all go armed--armed
against evil things, spiritual as well as physical." Here Quincey Morris
added:--

"I understand that the Count comes from a wolf country, and it may be
that he shall get there before us. I propose that we add Winchesters to
our armament. I have a kind of belief in a Winchester when there is any
trouble of that sort around. Do you remember, Art, when we had the pack
after us at Tobolsk? What wouldn't we have given then for a repeater
apiece!"

"Good!" said Van Helsing, "Winchesters it shall be. Quincey's head is
level at all times, but most so when there is to hunt, metaphor be more
dishonour to science than wolves be of danger to man. In the meantime we
can do nothing here; and as I think that Varna is not familiar to any of
us, why not go there more soon? It is as long to wait here as there.
To-night and to-morrow we can get ready, and then, if all be well, we
four can set out on our journey."

"We four?" said Harker interrogatively, looking from one to another of
us.

"Of course!" answered the Professor quickly, "you must remain to take
care of your so sweet wife!" Harker was silent for awhile and then said
in a hollow voice:--

"Let us talk of that part of it in the morning. I want to consult with
Mina." I thought that now was the time for Van Helsing to warn him not
to disclose our plans to her; but he took no notice. I looked at him
significantly and coughed. For answer he put his finger on his lips and
turned away.


_Jonathan Harker's Journal._

_5 October, afternoon._--For some time after our meeting this morning I
could not think. The new phases of things leave my mind in a state of
wonder which allows no room for active thought. Mina's determination not
to take any part in the discussion set me thinking; and as I could not
argue the matter with her, I could only guess. I am as far as ever from
a solution now. The way the others received it, too, puzzled me; the
last time we talked of the subject we agreed that there was to be no
more concealment of anything amongst us. Mina is sleeping now, calmly
and sweetly like a little child. Her lips are curved and her face beams
with happiness. Thank God, there are such moments still for her.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--How strange it all is. I sat watching Mina's happy sleep, and
came as near to being happy myself as I suppose I shall ever be. As the
evening drew on, and the earth took its shadows from the sun sinking
lower, the silence of the room grew more and more solemn to me. All at
once Mina opened her eyes, and looking at me tenderly, said:--

"Jonathan, I want you to promise me something on your word of honour. A
promise made to me, but made holily in God's hearing, and not to be
broken though I should go down on my knees and implore you with bitter
tears. Quick, you must make it to me at once."

"Mina," I said, "a promise like that, I cannot make at once. I may have
no right to make it."

"But, dear one," she said, with such spiritual intensity that her eyes
were like pole stars, "it is I who wish it; and it is not for myself.
You can ask Dr. Van Helsing if I am not right; if he disagrees you may
do as you will. Nay, more, if you all agree, later, you are absolved
from the promise."

"I promise!" I said, and for a moment she looked supremely happy; though
to me all happiness for her was denied by the red scar on her forehead.
She said:--

"Promise me that you will not tell me anything of the plans formed for
the campaign against the Count. Not by word, or inference, or
implication; not at any time whilst this remains to me!" and she
solemnly pointed to the scar. I saw that she was in earnest, and said
solemnly:--

"I promise!" and as I said it I felt that from that instant a door had
been shut between us.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later, midnight._--Mina has been bright and cheerful all the evening.
So much so that all the rest seemed to take courage, as if infected
somewhat with her gaiety; as a result even I myself felt as if the pall
of gloom which weighs us down were somewhat lifted. We all retired
early. Mina is now sleeping like a little child; it is a wonderful thing
that her faculty of sleep remains to her in the midst of her terrible
trouble. Thank God for it, for then at least she can forget her care.
Perhaps her example may affect me as her gaiety did to-night. I shall
try it. Oh! for a dreamless sleep.

       *       *       *       *       *

_6 October, morning._--Another surprise. Mina woke me early, about the
same time as yesterday, and asked me to bring Dr. Van Helsing. I thought
that it was another occasion for hypnotism, and without question went
for the Professor. He had evidently expected some such call, for I found
him dressed in his room. His door was ajar, so that he could hear the
opening of the door of our room. He came at once; as he passed into the
room, he asked Mina if the others might come, too.

"No," she said quite simply, "it will not be necessary. You can tell
them just as well. I must go with you on your journey."

Dr. Van Helsing was as startled as I was. After a moment's pause he
asked:--

"But why?"

"You must take me with you. I am safer with you, and you shall be safer,
too."

"But why, dear Madam Mina? You know that your safety is our solemnest
duty. We go into danger, to which you are, or may be, more liable than
any of us from--from circumstances--things that have been." He paused,
embarrassed.

As she replied, she raised her finger and pointed to her forehead:--

"I know. That is why I must go. I can tell you now, whilst the sun is
coming up; I may not be able again. I know that when the Count wills me
I must go. I know that if he tells me to come in secret, I must come by
wile; by any device to hoodwink--even Jonathan." God saw the look that
she turned on me as she spoke, and if there be indeed a Recording Angel
that look is noted to her everlasting honour. I could only clasp her
hand. I could not speak; my emotion was too great for even the relief of
tears. She went on:--

"You men are brave and strong. You are strong in your numbers, for you
can defy that which would break down the human endurance of one who had
to guard alone. Besides, I may be of service, since you can hypnotise me
and so learn that which even I myself do not know." Dr. Van Helsing said
very gravely:--

"Madam Mina, you are, as always, most wise. You shall with us come; and
together we shall do that which we go forth to achieve." When he had
spoken, Mina's long spell of silence made me look at her. She had fallen
back on her pillow asleep; she did not even wake when I had pulled up
the blind and let in the sunlight which flooded the room. Van Helsing
motioned to me to come with him quietly. We went to his room, and within
a minute Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward, and Mr. Morris were with us also.
He told them what Mina had said, and went on:--

"In the morning we shall leave for Varna. We have now to deal with a
new factor: Madam Mina. Oh, but her soul is true. It is to her an agony
to tell us so much as she has done; but it is most right, and we are
warned in time. There must be no chance lost, and in Varna we must be
ready to act the instant when that ship arrives."

"What shall we do exactly?" asked Mr. Morris laconically. The Professor
paused before replying:--

"We shall at the first board that ship; then, when we have identified
the box, we shall place a branch of the wild rose on it. This we shall
fasten, for when it is there none can emerge; so at least says the
superstition. And to superstition must we trust at the first; it was
man's faith in the early, and it have its root in faith still. Then,
when we get the opportunity that we seek, when none are near to see, we
shall open the box, and--and all will be well."

"I shall not wait for any opportunity," said Morris. "When I see the box
I shall open it and destroy the monster, though there were a thousand
men looking on, and if I am to be wiped out for it the next moment!" I
grasped his hand instinctively and found it as firm as a piece of steel.
I think he understood my look; I hope he did.

"Good boy," said Dr. Van Helsing. "Brave boy. Quincey is all man. God
bless him for it. My child, believe me none of us shall lag behind or
pause from any fear. I do but say what we may do--what we must do. But,
indeed, indeed we cannot say what we shall do. There are so many things
which may happen, and their ways and their ends are so various that
until the moment we may not say. We shall all be armed, in all ways; and
when the time for the end has come, our effort shall not be lack. Now
let us to-day put all our affairs in order. Let all things which touch
on others dear to us, and who on us depend, be complete; for none of us
can tell what, or when, or how, the end may be. As for me, my own
affairs are regulate; and as I have nothing else to do, I shall go make
arrangements for the travel. I shall have all tickets and so forth for
our journey."

There was nothing further to be said, and we parted. I shall now settle
up all my affairs of earth, and be ready for whatever may come....

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--It is all done; my will is made, and all complete. Mina if she
survive is my sole heir. If it should not be so, then the others who
have been so good to us shall have remainder.

It is now drawing towards the sunset; Mina's uneasiness calls my
attention to it. I am sure that there is something on her mind which the
time of exact sunset will reveal. These occasions are becoming harrowing
times for us all, for each sunrise and sunset opens up some new
danger--some new pain, which, however, may in God's will be means to a
good end. I write all these things in the diary since my darling must
not hear them now; but if it may be that she can see them again, they
shall be ready.

She is calling to me.




CHAPTER XXV

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


_11 October, Evening._--Jonathan Harker has asked me to note this, as he
says he is hardly equal to the task, and he wants an exact record kept.

I think that none of us were surprised when we were asked to see Mrs.
Harker a little before the time of sunset. We have of late come to
understand that sunrise and sunset are to her times of peculiar freedom;
when her old self can be manifest without any controlling force subduing
or restraining her, or inciting her to action. This mood or condition
begins some half hour or more before actual sunrise or sunset, and lasts
till either the sun is high, or whilst the clouds are still aglow with
the rays streaming above the horizon. At first there is a sort of
negative condition, as if some tie were loosened, and then the absolute
freedom quickly follows; when, however, the freedom ceases the
change-back or relapse comes quickly, preceded only by a spell of
warning silence.

To-night, when we met, she was somewhat constrained, and bore all the
signs of an internal struggle. I put it down myself to her making a
violent effort at the earliest instant she could do so. A very few
minutes, however, gave her complete control of herself; then, motioning
her husband to sit beside her on the sofa where she was half reclining,
she made the rest of us bring chairs up close. Taking her husband's hand
in hers began:--

"We are all here together in freedom, for perhaps the last time! I know,
dear; I know that you will always be with me to the end." This was to
her husband whose hand had, as we could see, tightened upon hers. "In
the morning we go out upon our task, and God alone knows what may be in
store for any of us. You are going to be so good to me as to take me
with you. I know that all that brave earnest men can do for a poor weak
woman, whose soul perhaps is lost--no, no, not yet, but is at any rate
at stake--you will do. But you must remember that I am not as you are.
There is a poison in my blood, in my soul, which may destroy me; which
must destroy me, unless some relief comes to us. Oh, my friends, you
know as well as I do, that my soul is at stake; and though I know there
is one way out for me, you must not and I must not take it!" She looked
appealingly to us all in turn, beginning and ending with her husband.

"What is that way?" asked Van Helsing in a hoarse voice. "What is that
way, which we must not--may not--take?"

"That I may die now, either by my own hand or that of another, before
the greater evil is entirely wrought. I know, and you know, that were I
once dead you could and would set free my immortal spirit, even as you
did my poor Lucy's. Were death, or the fear of death, the only thing
that stood in the way I would not shrink to die here, now, amidst the
friends who love me. But death is not all. I cannot believe that to die
in such a case, when there is hope before us and a bitter task to be
done, is God's will. Therefore, I, on my part, give up here the
certainty of eternal rest, and go out into the dark where may be the
blackest things that the world or the nether world holds!" We were all
silent, for we knew instinctively that this was only a prelude. The
faces of the others were set and Harker's grew ashen grey; perhaps he
guessed better than any of us what was coming. She continued:--

"This is what I can give into the hotch-pot." I could not but note the
quaint legal phrase which she used in such a place, and with all
seriousness. "What will each of you give? Your lives I know," she went
on quickly, "that is easy for brave men. Your lives are God's, and you
can give them back to Him; but what will you give to me?" She looked
again questioningly, but this time avoided her husband's face. Quincey
seemed to understand; he nodded, and her face lit up. "Then I shall tell
you plainly what I want, for there must be no doubtful matter in this
connection between us now. You must promise me, one and all--even you,
my beloved husband--that, should the time come, you will kill me."

"What is that time?" The voice was Quincey's, but it was low and
strained.

"When you shall be convinced that I am so changed that it is better that
I die than I may live. When I am thus dead in the flesh, then you will,
without a moment's delay, drive a stake through me and cut off my head;
or do whatever else may be wanting to give me rest!"

Quincey was the first to rise after the pause. He knelt down before her
and taking her hand in his said solemnly:--

"I'm only a rough fellow, who hasn't, perhaps, lived as a man should to
win such a distinction, but I swear to you by all that I hold sacred and
dear that, should the time ever come, I shall not flinch from the duty
that you have set us. And I promise you, too, that I shall make all
certain, for if I am only doubtful I shall take it that the time has
come!"

"My true friend!" was all she could say amid her fast-falling tears, as,
bending over, she kissed his hand.

"I swear the same, my dear Madam Mina!" said Van Helsing.

"And I!" said Lord Godalming, each of them in turn kneeling to her to
take the oath. I followed, myself. Then her husband turned to her
wan-eyed and with a greenish pallor which subdued the snowy whiteness of
his hair, and asked:--

"And must I, too, make such a promise, oh, my wife?"

"You too, my dearest," she said, with infinite yearning of pity in her
voice and eyes. "You must not shrink. You are nearest and dearest and
all the world to me; our souls are knit into one, for all life and all
time. Think, dear, that there have been times when brave men have killed
their wives and their womenkind, to keep them from falling into the
hands of the enemy. Their hands did not falter any the more because
those that they loved implored them to slay them. It is men's duty
towards those whom they love, in such times of sore trial! And oh, my
dear, if it is to be that I must meet death at any hand, let it be at
the hand of him that loves me best. Dr. Van Helsing, I have not
forgotten your mercy in poor Lucy's case to him who loved"--she stopped
with a flying blush, and changed her phrase--"to him who had best right
to give her peace. If that time shall come again, I look to you to make
it a happy memory of my husband's life that it was his loving hand which
set me free from the awful thrall upon me."

"Again I swear!" came the Professor's resonant voice. Mrs. Harker
smiled, positively smiled, as with a sigh of relief she leaned back and
said:--

"And now one word of warning, a warning which you must never forget:
this time, if it ever come, may come quickly and unexpectedly, and in
such case you must lose no time in using your opportunity. At such a
time I myself might be--nay! if the time ever comes, _shall be_--leagued
with your enemy against you."

"One more request;" she became very solemn as she said this, "it is not
vital and necessary like the other, but I want you to do one thing for
me, if you will." We all acquiesced, but no one spoke; there was no need
to speak:--

"I want you to read the Burial Service." She was interrupted by a deep
groan from her husband; taking his hand in hers, she held it over her
heart, and continued: "You must read it over me some day. Whatever may
be the issue of all this fearful state of things, it will be a sweet
thought to all or some of us. You, my dearest, will I hope read it, for
then it will be in your voice in my memory for ever--come what may!"

"But oh, my dear one," he pleaded, "death is afar off from you."

"Nay," she said, holding up a warning hand. "I am deeper in death at
this moment than if the weight of an earthly grave lay heavy upon me!"

"Oh, my wife, must I read it?" he said, before he began.

"It would comfort me, my husband!" was all she said; and he began to
read when she had got the book ready.

"How can I--how could any one--tell of that strange scene, its
solemnity, its gloom, its sadness, its horror; and, withal, its
sweetness. Even a sceptic, who can see nothing but a travesty of bitter
truth in anything holy or emotional, would have been melted to the heart
had he seen that little group of loving and devoted friends kneeling
round that stricken and sorrowing lady; or heard the tender passion of
her husband's voice, as in tones so broken with emotion that often he
had to pause, he read the simple and beautiful service from the Burial
of the Dead. I--I cannot go on--words--and--v-voice--f-fail m-me!"

       *       *       *       *       *

She was right in her instinct. Strange as it all was, bizarre as it may
hereafter seem even to us who felt its potent influence at the time, it
comforted us much; and the silence, which showed Mrs. Harker's coming
relapse from her freedom of soul, did not seem so full of despair to any
of us as we had dreaded.


_Jonathan Harker's Journal._

_15 October, Varna._--We left Charing Cross on the morning of the 12th,
got to Paris the same night, and took the places secured for us in the
Orient Express. We travelled night and day, arriving here at about five
o'clock. Lord Godalming went to the Consulate to see if any telegram had
arrived for him, whilst the rest of us came on to this hotel--"the
Odessus." The journey may have had incidents; I was, however, too eager
to get on, to care for them. Until the _Czarina Catherine_ comes into
port there will be no interest for me in anything in the wide world.
Thank God! Mina is well, and looks to be getting stronger; her colour is
coming back. She sleeps a great deal; throughout the journey she slept
nearly all the time. Before sunrise and sunset, however, she is very
wakeful and alert; and it has become a habit for Van Helsing to
hypnotise her at such times. At first, some effort was needed, and he
had to make many passes; but now, she seems to yield at once, as if by
habit, and scarcely any action is needed. He seems to have power at
these particular moments to simply will, and her thoughts obey him. He
always asks her what she can see and hear. She answers to the first:--

"Nothing; all is dark." And to the second:--

"I can hear the waves lapping against the ship, and the water rushing
by. Canvas and cordage strain and masts and yards creak. The wind is
high--I can hear it in the shrouds, and the bow throws back the foam."
It is evident that the _Czarina Catherine_ is still at sea, hastening on
her way to Varna. Lord Godalming has just returned. He had four
telegrams, one each day since we started, and all to the same effect:
that the _Czarina Catherine_ had not been reported to Lloyd's from
anywhere. He had arranged before leaving London that his agent should
send him every day a telegram saying if the ship had been reported. He
was to have a message even if she were not reported, so that he might be
sure that there was a watch being kept at the other end of the wire.

We had dinner and went to bed early. To-morrow we are to see the
Vice-Consul, and to arrange, if we can, about getting on board the ship
as soon as she arrives. Van Helsing says that our chance will be to get
on the boat between sunrise and sunset. The Count, even if he takes the
form of a bat, cannot cross the running water of his own volition, and
so cannot leave the ship. As he dare not change to man's form without
suspicion--which he evidently wishes to avoid--he must remain in the
box. If, then, we can come on board after sunrise, he is at our mercy;
for we can open the box and make sure of him, as we did of poor Lucy,
before he wakes. What mercy he shall get from us will not count for
much. We think that we shall not have much trouble with officials or the
seamen. Thank God! this is the country where bribery can do anything,
and we are well supplied with money. We have only to make sure that the
ship cannot come into port between sunset and sunrise without our being
warned, and we shall be safe. Judge Moneybag will settle this case, I
think!

       *       *       *       *       *

_16 October._--Mina's report still the same: lapping waves and rushing
water, darkness and favouring winds. We are evidently in good time, and
when we hear of the _Czarina Catherine_ we shall be ready. As she must
pass the Dardanelles we are sure to have some report.

       *       *       *       *       *

_17 October._--Everything is pretty well fixed now, I think, to welcome
the Count on his return from his tour. Godalming told the shippers that
he fancied that the box sent aboard might contain something stolen from
a friend of his, and got a half consent that he might open it at his own
risk. The owner gave him a paper telling the Captain to give him every
facility in doing whatever he chose on board the ship, and also a
similar authorisation to his agent at Varna. We have seen the agent, who
was much impressed with Godalming's kindly manner to him, and we are all
satisfied that whatever he can do to aid our wishes will be done. We
have already arranged what to do in case we get the box open. If the
Count is there, Van Helsing and Seward will cut off his head at once and
drive a stake through his heart. Morris and Godalming and I shall
prevent interference, even if we have to use the arms which we shall
have ready. The Professor says that if we can so treat the Count's body,
it will soon after fall into dust. In such case there would be no
evidence against us, in case any suspicion of murder were aroused. But
even if it were not, we should stand or fall by our act, and perhaps
some day this very script may be evidence to come between some of us and
a rope. For myself, I should take the chance only too thankfully if it
were to come. We mean to leave no stone unturned to carry out our
intent. We have arranged with certain officials that the instant the
_Czarina Catherine_ is seen, we are to be informed by a special
messenger.

       *       *       *       *       *

_24 October._--A whole week of waiting. Daily telegrams to Godalming,
but only the same story: "Not yet reported." Mina's morning and evening
hypnotic answer is unvaried: lapping waves, rushing water, and creaking
masts.

_Telegram, October 24th._

_Rufus Smith, Lloyd's, London, to Lord Godalming, care of H. B. M.
Vice-Consul, Varna._

"_Czarina Catherine_ reported this morning from Dardanelles."


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_25 October._--How I miss my phonograph! To write diary with a pen is
irksome to me; but Van Helsing says I must. We were all wild with
excitement yesterday when Godalming got his telegram from Lloyd's. I
know now what men feel in battle when the call to action is heard. Mrs.
Harker, alone of our party, did not show any signs of emotion. After
all, it is not strange that she did not; for we took special care not to
let her know anything about it, and we all tried not to show any
excitement when we were in her presence. In old days she would, I am
sure, have noticed, no matter how we might have tried to conceal it; but
in this way she is greatly changed during the past three weeks. The
lethargy grows upon her, and though she seems strong and well, and is
getting back some of her colour, Van Helsing and I are not satisfied. We
talk of her often; we have not, however, said a word to the others. It
would break poor Harker's heart--certainly his nerve--if he knew that we
had even a suspicion on the subject. Van Helsing examines, he tells me,
her teeth very carefully, whilst she is in the hypnotic condition, for
he says that so long as they do not begin to sharpen there is no active
danger of a change in her. If this change should come, it would be
necessary to take steps!... We both know what those steps would have to
be, though we do not mention our thoughts to each other. We should
neither of us shrink from the task--awful though it be to contemplate.
"Euthanasia" is an excellent and a comforting word! I am grateful to
whoever invented it.

It is only about 24 hours' sail from the Dardanelles to here, at the
rate the _Czarina Catherine_ has come from London. She should therefore
arrive some time in the morning; but as she cannot possibly get in
before then, we are all about to retire early. We shall get up at one
o'clock, so as to be ready.

       *       *       *       *       *

_25 October, Noon_.--No news yet of the ship's arrival. Mrs. Harker's
hypnotic report this morning was the same as usual, so it is possible
that we may get news at any moment. We men are all in a fever of
excitement, except Harker, who is calm; his hands are cold as ice, and
an hour ago I found him whetting the edge of the great Ghoorka knife
which he now always carries with him. It will be a bad lookout for the
Count if the edge of that "Kukri" ever touches his throat, driven by
that stern, ice-cold hand!

Van Helsing and I were a little alarmed about Mrs. Harker to-day. About
noon she got into a sort of lethargy which we did not like; although we
kept silence to the others, we were neither of us happy about it. She
had been restless all the morning, so that we were at first glad to know
that she was sleeping. When, however, her husband mentioned casually
that she was sleeping so soundly that he could not wake her, we went to
her room to see for ourselves. She was breathing naturally and looked so
well and peaceful that we agreed that the sleep was better for her than
anything else. Poor girl, she has so much to forget that it is no wonder
that sleep, if it brings oblivion to her, does her good.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Our opinion was justified, for when after a refreshing sleep
of some hours she woke up, she seemed brighter and better than she had
been for days. At sunset she made the usual hypnotic report. Wherever he
may be in the Black Sea, the Count is hurrying to his destination. To
his doom, I trust!

       *       *       *       *       *

_26 October._--Another day and no tidings of the _Czarina Catherine_.
She ought to be here by now. That she is still journeying _somewhere_ is
apparent, for Mrs. Harker's hypnotic report at sunrise was still the
same. It is possible that the vessel may be lying by, at times, for fog;
some of the steamers which came in last evening reported patches of fog
both to north and south of the port. We must continue our watching, as
the ship may now be signalled any moment.

       *       *       *       *       *

_27 October, Noon._--Most strange; no news yet of the ship we wait for.
Mrs. Harker reported last night and this morning as usual: "lapping
waves and rushing water," though she added that "the waves were very
faint." The telegrams from London have been the same: "no further
report." Van Helsing is terribly anxious, and told me just now that he
fears the Count is escaping us. He added significantly:--

"I did not like that lethargy of Madam Mina's. Souls and memories can do
strange things during trance." I was about to ask him more, but Harker
just then came in, and he held up a warning hand. We must try to-night
at sunset to make her speak more fully when in her hypnotic state.

       *       *       *       *       *

     _28 October._--Telegram. _Rufus Smith, London, to Lord Godalming,
     care H. B. M. Vice Consul, Varna._

     "_Czarina Catherine_ reported entering Galatz at one o'clock
     to-day."


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_28 October._--When the telegram came announcing the arrival in Galatz I
do not think it was such a shock to any of us as might have been
expected. True, we did not know whence, or how, or when, the bolt would
come; but I think we all expected that something strange would happen.
The delay of arrival at Varna made us individually satisfied that things
would not be just as we had expected; we only waited to learn where the
change would occur. None the less, however, was it a surprise. I suppose
that nature works on such a hopeful basis that we believe against
ourselves that things will be as they ought to be, not as we should know
that they will be. Transcendentalism is a beacon to the angels, even if
it be a will-o'-the-wisp to man. It was an odd experience and we all
took it differently. Van Helsing raised his hand over his head for a
moment, as though in remonstrance with the Almighty; but he said not a
word, and in a few seconds stood up with his face sternly set. Lord
Godalming grew very pale, and sat breathing heavily. I was myself half
stunned and looked in wonder at one after another. Quincey Morris
tightened his belt with that quick movement which I knew so well; in our
old wandering days it meant "action." Mrs. Harker grew ghastly white, so
that the scar on her forehead seemed to burn, but she folded her hands
meekly and looked up in prayer. Harker smiled--actually smiled--the
dark, bitter smile of one who is without hope; but at the same time his
action belied his words, for his hands instinctively sought the hilt of
the great Kukri knife and rested there. "When does the next train start
for Galatz?" said Van Helsing to us generally.

"At 6:30 to-morrow morning!" We all started, for the answer came from
Mrs. Harker.

"How on earth do you know?" said Art.

"You forget--or perhaps you do not know, though Jonathan does and so
does Dr. Van Helsing--that I am the train fiend. At home in Exeter I
always used to make up the time-tables, so as to be helpful to my
husband. I found it so useful sometimes, that I always make a study of
the time-tables now. I knew that if anything were to take us to Castle
Dracula we should go by Galatz, or at any rate through Bucharest, so I
learned the times very carefully. Unhappily there are not many to learn,
as the only train to-morrow leaves as I say."

"Wonderful woman!" murmured the Professor.

"Can't we get a special?" asked Lord Godalming. Van Helsing shook his
head: "I fear not. This land is very different from yours or mine; even
if we did have a special, it would probably not arrive as soon as our
regular train. Moreover, we have something to prepare. We must think.
Now let us organize. You, friend Arthur, go to the train and get the
tickets and arrange that all be ready for us to go in the morning. Do
you, friend Jonathan, go to the agent of the ship and get from him
letters to the agent in Galatz, with authority to make search the ship
just as it was here. Morris Quincey, you see the Vice-Consul, and get
his aid with his fellow in Galatz and all he can do to make our way
smooth, so that no times be lost when over the Danube. John will stay
with Madam Mina and me, and we shall consult. For so if time be long you
may be delayed; and it will not matter when the sun set, since I am here
with Madam to make report."

"And I," said Mrs. Harker brightly, and more like her old self than she
had been for many a long day, "shall try to be of use in all ways, and
shall think and write for you as I used to do. Something is shifting
from me in some strange way, and I feel freer than I have been of late!"
The three younger men looked happier at the moment as they seemed to
realise the significance of her words; but Van Helsing and I, turning to
each other, met each a grave and troubled glance. We said nothing at the
time, however.

When the three men had gone out to their tasks Van Helsing asked Mrs.
Harker to look up the copy of the diaries and find him the part of
Harker's journal at the Castle. She went away to get it; when the door
was shut upon her he said to me:--

"We mean the same! speak out!"

"There is some change. It is a hope that makes me sick, for it may
deceive us."

"Quite so. Do you know why I asked her to get the manuscript?"

"No!" said I, "unless it was to get an opportunity of seeing me alone."

"You are in part right, friend John, but only in part. I want to tell
you something. And oh, my friend, I am taking a great--a terrible--risk;
but I believe it is right. In the moment when Madam Mina said those
words that arrest both our understanding, an inspiration came to me. In
the trance of three days ago the Count sent her his spirit to read her
mind; or more like he took her to see him in his earth-box in the ship
with water rushing, just as it go free at rise and set of sun. He learn
then that we are here; for she have more to tell in her open life with
eyes to see and ears to hear than he, shut, as he is, in his coffin-box.
Now he make his most effort to escape us. At present he want her not.

"He is sure with his so great knowledge that she will come at his call;
but he cut her off--take her, as he can do, out of his own power, that
so she come not to him. Ah! there I have hope that our man-brains that
have been of man so long and that have not lost the grace of God, will
come higher than his child-brain that lie in his tomb for centuries,
that grow not yet to our stature, and that do only work selfish and
therefore small. Here comes Madam Mina; not a word to her of her trance!
She know it not; and it would overwhelm her and make despair just when
we want all her hope, all her courage; when most we want all her great
brain which is trained like man's brain, but is of sweet woman and have
a special power which the Count give her, and which he may not take away
altogether--though he think not so. Hush! let me speak, and you shall
learn. Oh, John, my friend, we are in awful straits. I fear, as I never
feared before. We can only trust the good God. Silence! here she comes!"

I thought that the Professor was going to break down and have hysterics,
just as he had when Lucy died, but with a great effort he controlled
himself and was at perfect nervous poise when Mrs. Harker tripped into
the room, bright and happy-looking and, in the doing of work, seemingly
forgetful of her misery. As she came in, she handed a number of sheets
of typewriting to Van Helsing. He looked over them gravely, his face
brightening up as he read. Then holding the pages between his finger and
thumb he said:--

"Friend John, to you with so much of experience already--and you, too,
dear Madam Mina, that are young--here is a lesson: do not fear ever to
think. A half-thought has been buzzing often in my brain, but I fear to
let him loose his wings. Here now, with more knowledge, I go back to
where that half-thought come from and I find that he be no half-thought
at all; that be a whole thought, though so young that he is not yet
strong to use his little wings. Nay, like the "Ugly Duck" of my friend
Hans Andersen, he be no duck-thought at all, but a big swan-thought that
sail nobly on big wings, when the time come for him to try them. See I
read here what Jonathan have written:--

"That other of his race who, in a later age, again and again, brought
his forces over The Great River into Turkey Land; who, when he was
beaten back, came again, and again, and again, though he had to come
alone from the bloody field where his troops were being slaughtered,
since he knew that he alone could ultimately triumph."

"What does this tell us? Not much? no! The Count's child-thought see
nothing; therefore he speak so free. Your man-thought see nothing; my
man-thought see nothing, till just now. No! But there comes another word
from some one who speak without thought because she, too, know not what
it mean--what it _might_ mean. Just as there are elements which rest,
yet when in nature's course they move on their way and they touch--then
pouf! and there comes a flash of light, heaven wide, that blind and kill
and destroy some; but that show up all earth below for leagues and
leagues. Is it not so? Well, I shall explain. To begin, have you ever
study the philosophy of crime? 'Yes' and 'No.' You, John, yes; for it is
a study of insanity. You, no, Madam Mina; for crime touch you not--not
but once. Still, your mind works true, and argues not _a particulari ad
universale_. There is this peculiarity in criminals. It is so constant,
in all countries and at all times, that even police, who know not much
from philosophy, come to know it empirically, that _it is_. That is to
be empiric. The criminal always work at one crime--that is the true
criminal who seems predestinate to crime, and who will of none other.
This criminal has not full man-brain. He is clever and cunning and
resourceful; but he be not of man-stature as to brain. He be of
child-brain in much. Now this criminal of ours is predestinate to crime
also; he, too, have child-brain, and it is of the child to do what he
have done. The little bird, the little fish, the little animal learn not
by principle, but empirically; and when he learn to do, then there is to
him the ground to start from to do more. '_Dos pou sto_,' said
Archimedes. 'Give me a fulcrum, and I shall move the world!' To do once,
is the fulcrum whereby child-brain become man-brain; and until he have
the purpose to do more, he continue to do the same again every time,
just as he have done before! Oh, my dear, I see that your eyes are
opened, and that to you the lightning flash show all the leagues," for
Mrs. Harker began to clap her hands and her eyes sparkled. He went on:--

"Now you shall speak. Tell us two dry men of science what you see with
those so bright eyes." He took her hand and held it whilst she spoke.
His finger and thumb closed on her pulse, as I thought instinctively and
unconsciously, as she spoke:--

"The Count is a criminal and of criminal type. Nordau and Lombroso would
so classify him, and _quâ_ criminal he is of imperfectly formed mind.
Thus, in a difficulty he has to seek resource in habit. His past is a
clue, and the one page of it that we know--and that from his own
lips--tells that once before, when in what Mr. Morris would call a
'tight place,' he went back to his own country from the land he had
tried to invade, and thence, without losing purpose, prepared himself
for a new effort. He came again better equipped for his work; and won.
So he came to London to invade a new land. He was beaten, and when all
hope of success was lost, and his existence in danger, he fled back over
the sea to his home; just as formerly he had fled back over the Danube
from Turkey Land."

"Good, good! oh, you so clever lady!" said Van Helsing,
enthusiastically, as he stooped and kissed her hand. A moment later he
said to me, as calmly as though we had been having a sick-room
consultation:--

"Seventy-two only; and in all this excitement. I have hope." Turning to
her again, he said with keen expectation:--

"But go on. Go on! there is more to tell if you will. Be not afraid;
John and I know. I do in any case, and shall tell you if you are right.
Speak, without fear!"

"I will try to; but you will forgive me if I seem egotistical."

"Nay! fear not, you must be egotist, for it is of you that we think."

"Then, as he is criminal he is selfish; and as his intellect is small
and his action is based on selfishness, he confines himself to one
purpose. That purpose is remorseless. As he fled back over the Danube,
leaving his forces to be cut to pieces, so now he is intent on being
safe, careless of all. So his own selfishness frees my soul somewhat
from the terrible power which he acquired over me on that dreadful
night. I felt it! Oh, I felt it! Thank God, for His great mercy! My soul
is freer than it has been since that awful hour; and all that haunts me
is a fear lest in some trance or dream he may have used my knowledge for
his ends." The Professor stood up:--

"He has so used your mind; and by it he has left us here in Varna,
whilst the ship that carried him rushed through enveloping fog up to
Galatz, where, doubtless, he had made preparation for escaping from us.
But his child-mind only saw so far; and it may be that, as ever is in
God's Providence, the very thing that the evil-doer most reckoned on for
his selfish good, turns out to be his chiefest harm. The hunter is taken
in his own snare, as the great Psalmist says. For now that he think he
is free from every trace of us all, and that he has escaped us with so
many hours to him, then his selfish child-brain will whisper him to
sleep. He think, too, that as he cut himself off from knowing your mind,
there can be no knowledge of him to you; there is where he fail! That
terrible baptism of blood which he give you makes you free to go to him
in spirit, as you have as yet done in your times of freedom, when the
sun rise and set. At such times you go by my volition and not by his;
and this power to good of you and others, as you have won from your
suffering at his hands. This is now all the more precious that he know
it not, and to guard himself have even cut himself off from his
knowledge of our where. We, however, are not selfish, and we believe
that God is with us through all this blackness, and these many dark
hours. We shall follow him; and we shall not flinch; even if we peril
ourselves that we become like him. Friend John, this has been a great
hour; and it have done much to advance us on our way. You must be scribe
and write him all down, so that when the others return from their work
you can give it to them; then they shall know as we do."

And so I have written it whilst we wait their return, and Mrs. Harker
has written with her typewriter all since she brought the MS. to us.




CHAPTER XXVI

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


_29 October._--This is written in the train from Varna to Galatz. Last
night we all assembled a little before the time of sunset. Each of us
had done his work as well as he could; so far as thought, and endeavour,
and opportunity go, we are prepared for the whole of our journey, and
for our work when we get to Galatz. When the usual time came round Mrs.
Harker prepared herself for her hypnotic effort; and after a longer and
more serious effort on the part of Van Helsing than has been usually
necessary, she sank into the trance. Usually she speaks on a hint; but
this time the Professor had to ask her questions, and to ask them pretty
resolutely, before we could learn anything; at last her answer came:--

"I can see nothing; we are still; there are no waves lapping, but only a
steady swirl of water softly running against the hawser. I can hear
men's voices calling, near and far, and the roll and creak of oars in
the rowlocks. A gun is fired somewhere; the echo of it seems far away.
There is tramping of feet overhead, and ropes and chains are dragged
along. What is this? There is a gleam of light; I can feel the air
blowing upon me."

Here she stopped. She had risen, as if impulsively, from where she lay
on the sofa, and raised both her hands, palms upwards, as if lifting a
weight. Van Helsing and I looked at each other with understanding.
Quincey raised his eyebrows slightly and looked at her intently, whilst
Harker's hand instinctively closed round the hilt of his Kukri. There
was a long pause. We all knew that the time when she could speak was
passing; but we felt that it was useless to say anything. Suddenly she
sat up, and, as she opened her eyes, said sweetly:--

"Would none of you like a cup of tea? You must all be so tired!" We
could only make her happy, and so acquiesced. She bustled off to get
tea; when she had gone Van Helsing said:--

"You see, my friends. _He_ is close to land: he has left his
earth-chest. But he has yet to get on shore. In the night he may lie
hidden somewhere; but if he be not carried on shore, or if the ship do
not touch it, he cannot achieve the land. In such case he can, if it be
in the night, change his form and can jump or fly on shore, as he did
at Whitby. But if the day come before he get on shore, then, unless he
be carried he cannot escape. And if he be carried, then the customs men
may discover what the box contain. Thus, in fine, if he escape not on
shore to-night, or before dawn, there will be the whole day lost to him.
We may then arrive in time; for if he escape not at night we shall come
on him in daytime, boxed up and at our mercy; for he dare not be his
true self, awake and visible, lest he be discovered."

There was no more to be said, so we waited in patience until the dawn;
at which time we might learn more from Mrs. Harker.

Early this morning we listened, with breathless anxiety, for her
response in her trance. The hypnotic stage was even longer in coming
than before; and when it came the time remaining until full sunrise was
so short that we began to despair. Van Helsing seemed to throw his whole
soul into the effort; at last, in obedience to his will she made
reply:--

"All is dark. I hear lapping water, level with me, and some creaking as
of wood on wood." She paused, and the red sun shot up. We must wait till
to-night.

And so it is that we are travelling towards Galatz in an agony of
expectation. We are due to arrive between two and three in the morning;
but already, at Bucharest, we are three hours late, so we cannot
possibly get in till well after sun-up. Thus we shall have two more
hypnotic messages from Mrs. Harker; either or both may possibly throw
more light on what is happening.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Sunset has come and gone. Fortunately it came at a time when
there was no distraction; for had it occurred whilst we were at a
station, we might not have secured the necessary calm and isolation.
Mrs. Harker yielded to the hypnotic influence even less readily than
this morning. I am in fear that her power of reading the Count's
sensations may die away, just when we want it most. It seems to me that
her imagination is beginning to work. Whilst she has been in the trance
hitherto she has confined herself to the simplest of facts. If this goes
on it may ultimately mislead us. If I thought that the Count's power
over her would die away equally with her power of knowledge it would be
a happy thought; but I am afraid that it may not be so. When she did
speak, her words were enigmatical:--

"Something is going out; I can feel it pass me like a cold wind. I can
hear, far off, confused sounds--as of men talking in strange tongues,
fierce-falling water, and the howling of wolves." She stopped and a
shudder ran through her, increasing in intensity for a few seconds,
till, at the end, she shook as though in a palsy. She said no more, even
in answer to the Professor's imperative questioning. When she woke from
the trance, she was cold, and exhausted, and languid; but her mind was
all alert. She could not remember anything, but asked what she had said;
when she was told, she pondered over it deeply for a long time and in
silence.

       *       *       *       *       *

_30 October, 7 a. m._--We are near Galatz now, and I may not have time
to write later. Sunrise this morning was anxiously looked for by us all.
Knowing of the increasing difficulty of procuring the hypnotic trance,
Van Helsing began his passes earlier than usual. They produced no
effect, however, until the regular time, when she yielded with a still
greater difficulty, only a minute before the sun rose. The Professor
lost no time in his questioning; her answer came with equal quickness:--

"All is dark. I hear water swirling by, level with my ears, and the
creaking of wood on wood. Cattle low far off. There is another sound, a
queer one like----" She stopped and grew white, and whiter still.

"Go on; go on! Speak, I command you!" said Van Helsing in an agonised
voice. At the same time there was despair in his eyes, for the risen sun
was reddening even Mrs. Harker's pale face. She opened her eyes, and we
all started as she said, sweetly and seemingly with the utmost
unconcern:--

"Oh, Professor, why ask me to do what you know I can't? I don't remember
anything." Then, seeing the look of amazement on our faces, she said,
turning from one to the other with a troubled look:--

"What have I said? What have I done? I know nothing, only that I was
lying here, half asleep, and heard you say go on! speak, I command you!'
It seemed so funny to hear you order me about, as if I were a bad
child!"

"Oh, Madam Mina," he said, sadly, "it is proof, if proof be needed, of
how I love and honour you, when a word for your good, spoken more
earnest than ever, can seem so strange because it is to order her whom I
am proud to obey!"

The whistles are sounding; we are nearing Galatz. We are on fire with
anxiety and eagerness.


_Mina Harker's Journal._

_30 October._--Mr. Morris took me to the hotel where our rooms had been
ordered by telegraph, he being the one who could best be spared, since
he does not speak any foreign language. The forces were distributed
much as they had been at Varna, except that Lord Godalming went to the
Vice-Consul, as his rank might serve as an immediate guarantee of some
sort to the official, we being in extreme hurry. Jonathan and the two
doctors went to the shipping agent to learn particulars of the arrival
of the _Czarina Catherine_.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Lord Godalming has returned. The Consul is away, and the
Vice-Consul sick; so the routine work has been attended to by a clerk.
He was very obliging, and offered to do anything in his power.


_Jonathan Harker's Journal._

_30 October._--At nine o'clock Dr. Van Helsing, Dr. Seward, and I called
on Messrs. Mackenzie & Steinkoff, the agents of the London firm of
Hapgood. They had received a wire from London, in answer to Lord
Godalming's telegraphed request, asking us to show them any civility in
their power. They were more than kind and courteous, and took us at once
on board the _Czarina Catherine_, which lay at anchor out in the river
harbour. There we saw the Captain, Donelson by name, who told us of his
voyage. He said that in all his life he had never had so favourable a
run.

"Man!" he said, "but it made us afeard, for we expeckit that we should
have to pay for it wi' some rare piece o' ill luck, so as to keep up the
average. It's no canny to run frae London to the Black Sea wi' a wind
ahint ye, as though the Deil himself were blawin' on yer sail for his
ain purpose. An' a' the time we could no speer a thing. Gin we were nigh
a ship, or a port, or a headland, a fog fell on us and travelled wi' us,
till when after it had lifted and we looked out, the deil a thing could
we see. We ran by Gibraltar wi'oot bein' able to signal; an' till we
came to the Dardanelles and had to wait to get our permit to pass, we
never were within hail o' aught. At first I inclined to slack off sail
and beat about till the fog was lifted; but whiles, I thocht that if the
Deil was minded to get us into the Black Sea quick, he was like to do it
whether we would or no. If we had a quick voyage it would be no to our
miscredit wi' the owners, or no hurt to our traffic; an' the Old Mon who
had served his ain purpose wad be decently grateful to us for no
hinderin' him." This mixture of simplicity and cunning, of superstition
and commercial reasoning, aroused Van Helsing, who said:--

"Mine friend, that Devil is more clever than he is thought by some; and
he know when he meet his match!" The skipper was not displeased with the
compliment, and went on:--

"When we got past the Bosphorus the men began to grumble; some o' them,
the Roumanians, came and asked me to heave overboard a big box which had
been put on board by a queer lookin' old man just before we had started
frae London. I had seen them speer at the fellow, and put out their twa
fingers when they saw him, to guard against the evil eye. Man! but the
supersteetion of foreigners is pairfectly rideeculous! I sent them aboot
their business pretty quick; but as just after a fog closed in on us I
felt a wee bit as they did anent something, though I wouldn't say it was
agin the big box. Well, on we went, and as the fog didn't let up for
five days I joost let the wind carry us; for if the Deil wanted to get
somewheres--well, he would fetch it up a'reet. An' if he didn't, well,
we'd keep a sharp lookout anyhow. Sure eneuch, we had a fair way and
deep water all the time; and two days ago, when the mornin' sun came
through the fog, we found ourselves just in the river opposite Galatz.
The Roumanians were wild, and wanted me right or wrong to take out the
box and fling it in the river. I had to argy wi' them aboot it wi' a
handspike; an' when the last o' them rose off the deck wi' his head in
his hand, I had convinced them that, evil eye or no evil eye, the
property and the trust of my owners were better in my hands than in the
river Danube. They had, mind ye, taken the box on the deck ready to
fling in, and as it was marked Galatz _via_ Varna, I thocht I'd let it
lie till we discharged in the port an' get rid o't althegither. We
didn't do much clearin' that day, an' had to remain the nicht at anchor;
but in the mornin', braw an' airly, an hour before sun-up, a man came
aboard wi' an order, written to him from England, to receive a box
marked for one Count Dracula. Sure eneuch the matter was one ready to
his hand. He had his papers a' reet, an' glad I was to be rid o' the
dam' thing, for I was beginnin' masel' to feel uneasy at it. If the Deil
did have any luggage aboord the ship, I'm thinkin' it was nane ither
than that same!"

"What was the name of the man who took it?" asked Dr. Van Helsing with
restrained eagerness.

"I'll be tellin' ye quick!" he answered, and, stepping down to his
cabin, produced a receipt signed "Immanuel Hildesheim." Burgen-strasse
16 was the address. We found out that this was all the Captain knew; so
with thanks we came away.

We found Hildesheim in his office, a Hebrew of rather the Adelphi
Theatre type, with a nose like a sheep, and a fez. His arguments were
pointed with specie--we doing the punctuation--and with a little
bargaining he told us what he knew. This turned out to be simple but
important. He had received a letter from Mr. de Ville of London, telling
him to receive, if possible before sunrise so as to avoid customs, a box
which would arrive at Galatz in the _Czarina Catherine_. This he was to
give in charge to a certain Petrof Skinsky, who dealt with the Slovaks
who traded down the river to the port. He had been paid for his work by
an English bank note, which had been duly cashed for gold at the Danube
International Bank. When Skinsky had come to him, he had taken him to
the ship and handed over the box, so as to save porterage. That was all
he knew.

We then sought for Skinsky, but were unable to find him. One of his
neighbours, who did not seem to bear him any affection, said that he had
gone away two days before, no one knew whither. This was corroborated by
his landlord, who had received by messenger the key of the house
together with the rent due, in English money. This had been between ten
and eleven o'clock last night. We were at a standstill again.

Whilst we were talking one came running and breathlessly gasped out that
the body of Skinsky had been found inside the wall of the churchyard of
St. Peter, and that the throat had been torn open as if by some wild
animal. Those we had been speaking with ran off to see the horror, the
women crying out "This is the work of a Slovak!" We hurried away lest we
should have been in some way drawn into the affair, and so detained.

As we came home we could arrive at no definite conclusion. We were all
convinced that the box was on its way, by water, to somewhere; but where
that might be we would have to discover. With heavy hearts we came home
to the hotel to Mina.

When we met together, the first thing was to consult as to taking Mina
again into our confidence. Things are getting desperate, and it is at
least a chance, though a hazardous one. As a preliminary step, I was
released from my promise to her.


_Mina Harker's Journal._

_30 October, evening._--They were so tired and worn out and dispirited
that there was nothing to be done till they had some rest; so I asked
them all to lie down for half an hour whilst I should enter everything
up to the moment. I feel so grateful to the man who invented the
"Traveller's" typewriter, and to Mr. Morris for getting this one for
me. I should have felt quite astray doing the work if I had to write
with a pen....

It is all done; poor dear, dear Jonathan, what he must have suffered,
what must he be suffering now. He lies on the sofa hardly seeming to
breathe, and his whole body appears in collapse. His brows are knit; his
face is drawn with pain. Poor fellow, maybe he is thinking, and I can
see his face all wrinkled up with the concentration of his thoughts. Oh!
if I could only help at all.... I shall do what I can.

I have asked Dr. Van Helsing, and he has got me all the papers that I
have not yet seen.... Whilst they are resting, I shall go over all
carefully, and perhaps I may arrive at some conclusion. I shall try to
follow the Professor's example, and think without prejudice on the facts
before me....

       *       *       *       *       *

I do believe that under God's providence I have made a discovery. I
shall get the maps and look over them....

       *       *       *       *       *

I am more than ever sure that I am right. My new conclusion is ready, so
I shall get our party together and read it. They can judge it; it is
well to be accurate, and every minute is precious.


_Mina Harker's Memorandum._

(Entered in her Journal.)

_Ground of inquiry._--Count Dracula's problem is to get back to his own
place.

(_a_) He must be _brought back_ by some one. This is evident; for had he
power to move himself as he wished he could go either as man, or wolf,
or bat, or in some other way. He evidently fears discovery or
interference, in the state of helplessness in which he must be--confined
as he is between dawn and sunset in his wooden box.

(_b_) _How is he to be taken?_--Here a process of exclusions may help
us. By road, by rail, by water?

1. _By Road._--There are endless difficulties, especially in leaving the
city.

(_x_) There are people; and people are curious, and investigate. A hint,
a surmise, a doubt as to what might be in the box, would destroy him.

(_y_) There are, or there may be, customs and octroi officers to pass.

(_z_) His pursuers might follow. This is his highest fear; and in order
to prevent his being betrayed he has repelled, so far as he can, even
his victim--me!

2. _By Rail._--There is no one in charge of the box. It would have to
take its chance of being delayed; and delay would be fatal, with enemies
on the track. True, he might escape at night; but what would he be, if
left in a strange place with no refuge that he could fly to? This is not
what he intends; and he does not mean to risk it.

3. _By Water._--Here is the safest way, in one respect, but with most
danger in another. On the water he is powerless except at night; even
then he can only summon fog and storm and snow and his wolves. But were
he wrecked, the living water would engulf him, helpless; and he would
indeed be lost. He could have the vessel drive to land; but if it were
unfriendly land, wherein he was not free to move, his position would
still be desperate.

We know from the record that he was on the water; so what we have to do
is to ascertain _what_ water.

The first thing is to realise exactly what he has done as yet; we may,
then, get a light on what his later task is to be.

_Firstly._--We must differentiate between what he did in London as part
of his general plan of action, when he was pressed for moments and had
to arrange as best he could.

_Secondly_ we must see, as well as we can surmise it from the facts we
know of, what he has done here.

As to the first, he evidently intended to arrive at Galatz, and sent
invoice to Varna to deceive us lest we should ascertain his means of
exit from England; his immediate and sole purpose then was to escape.
The proof of this, is the letter of instructions sent to Immanuel
Hildesheim to clear and take away the box _before sunrise_. There is
also the instruction to Petrof Skinsky. These we must only guess at; but
there must have been some letter or message, since Skinsky came to
Hildesheim.

That, so far, his plans were successful we know. The _Czarina Catherine_
made a phenomenally quick journey--so much so that Captain Donelson's
suspicions were aroused; but his superstition united with his canniness
played the Count's game for him, and he ran with his favouring wind
through fogs and all till he brought up blindfold at Galatz. That the
Count's arrangements were well made, has been proved. Hildesheim cleared
the box, took it off, and gave it to Skinsky. Skinsky took it--and here
we lose the trail. We only know that the box is somewhere on the water,
moving along. The customs and the octroi, if there be any, have been
avoided.

Now we come to what the Count must have done after his arrival--_on
land_, at Galatz.

The box was given to Skinsky before sunrise. At sunrise the Count could
appear in his own form. Here, we ask why Skinsky was chosen at all to
aid in the work? In my husband's diary, Skinsky is mentioned as dealing
with the Slovaks who trade down the river to the port; and the man's
remark, that the murder was the work of a Slovak, showed the general
feeling against his class. The Count wanted isolation.

My surmise is, this: that in London the Count decided to get back to his
castle by water, as the most safe and secret way. He was brought from
the castle by Szgany, and probably they delivered their cargo to Slovaks
who took the boxes to Varna, for there they were shipped for London.
Thus the Count had knowledge of the persons who could arrange this
service. When the box was on land, before sunrise or after sunset, he
came out from his box, met Skinsky and instructed him what to do as to
arranging the carriage of the box up some river. When this was done, and
he knew that all was in train, he blotted out his traces, as he thought,
by murdering his agent.

I have examined the map and find that the river most suitable for the
Slovaks to have ascended is either the Pruth or the Sereth. I read in
the typescript that in my trance I heard cows low and water swirling
level with my ears and the creaking of wood. The Count in his box, then,
was on a river in an open boat--propelled probably either by oars or
poles, for the banks are near and it is working against stream. There
would be no such sound if floating down stream.

Of course it may not be either the Sereth or the Pruth, but we may
possibly investigate further. Now of these two, the Pruth is the more
easily navigated, but the Sereth is, at Fundu, joined by the Bistritza
which runs up round the Borgo Pass. The loop it makes is manifestly as
close to Dracula's castle as can be got by water.


_Mina Harker's Journal--continued._

When I had done reading, Jonathan took me in his arms and kissed me. The
others kept shaking me by both hands, and Dr. Van Helsing said:--

"Our dear Madam Mina is once more our teacher. Her eyes have been where
we were blinded. Now we are on the track once again, and this time we
may succeed. Our enemy is at his most helpless; and if we can come on
him by day, on the water, our task will be over. He has a start, but he
is powerless to hasten, as he may not leave his box lest those who carry
him may suspect; for them to suspect would be to prompt them to throw
him in the stream where he perish. This he knows, and will not. Now men,
to our Council of War; for, here and now, we must plan what each and all
shall do."

"I shall get a steam launch and follow him," said Lord Godalming.

"And I, horses to follow on the bank lest by chance he land," said Mr.
Morris.

"Good!" said the Professor, "both good. But neither must go alone. There
must be force to overcome force if need be; the Slovak is strong and
rough, and he carries rude arms." All the men smiled, for amongst them
they carried a small arsenal. Said Mr. Morris:--

"I have brought some Winchesters; they are pretty handy in a crowd, and
there may be wolves. The Count, if you remember, took some other
precautions; he made some requisitions on others that Mrs. Harker could
not quite hear or understand. We must be ready at all points." Dr.
Seward said:--

"I think I had better go with Quincey. We have been accustomed to hunt
together, and we two, well armed, will be a match for whatever may come
along. You must not be alone, Art. It may be necessary to fight the
Slovaks, and a chance thrust--for I don't suppose these fellows carry
guns--would undo all our plans. There must be no chances, this time; we
shall not rest until the Count's head and body have been separated, and
we are sure that he cannot re-incarnate." He looked at Jonathan as he
spoke, and Jonathan looked at me. I could see that the poor dear was
torn about in his mind. Of course he wanted to be with me; but then the
boat service would, most likely, be the one which would destroy the ...
the ... the ... Vampire. (Why did I hesitate to write the word?) He was
silent awhile, and during his silence Dr. Van Helsing spoke:--

"Friend Jonathan, this is to you for twice reasons. First, because you
are young and brave and can fight, and all energies may be needed at the
last; and again that it is your right to destroy him--that--which has
wrought such woe to you and yours. Be not afraid for Madam Mina; she
will be my care, if I may. I am old. My legs are not so quick to run as
once; and I am not used to ride so long or to pursue as need be, or to
fight with lethal weapons. But I can be of other service; I can fight in
other way. And I can die, if need be, as well as younger men. Now let
me say that what I would is this: while you, my Lord Godalming and
friend Jonathan go in your so swift little steamboat up the river, and
whilst John and Quincey guard the bank where perchance he might be
landed, I will take Madam Mina right into the heart of the enemy's
country. Whilst the old fox is tied in his box, floating on the running
stream whence he cannot escape to land--where he dares not raise the lid
of his coffin-box lest his Slovak carriers should in fear leave him to
perish--we shall go in the track where Jonathan went,--from Bistritz
over the Borgo, and find our way to the Castle of Dracula. Here, Madam
Mina's hypnotic power will surely help, and we shall find our way--all
dark and unknown otherwise--after the first sunrise when we are near
that fateful place. There is much to be done, and other places to be
made sanctify, so that that nest of vipers be obliterated." Here
Jonathan interrupted him hotly:--

"Do you mean to say, Professor Van Helsing, that you would bring Mina,
in her sad case and tainted as she is with that devil's illness, right
into the jaws of his death-trap? Not for the world! Not for Heaven or
Hell!" He became almost speechless for a minute, and then went on:--

"Do you know what the place is? Have you seen that awful den of hellish
infamy--with the very moonlight alive with grisly shapes, and every
speck of dust that whirls in the wind a devouring monster in embryo?
Have you felt the Vampire's lips upon your throat?" Here he turned to
me, and as his eyes lit on my forehead he threw up his arms with a cry:
"Oh, my God, what have we done to have this terror upon us!" and he sank
down on the sofa in a collapse of misery. The Professor's voice, as he
spoke in clear, sweet tones, which seemed to vibrate in the air, calmed
us all:--

"Oh, my friend, it is because I would save Madam Mina from that awful
place that I would go. God forbid that I should take her into that
place. There is work--wild work--to be done there, that her eyes may not
see. We men here, all save Jonathan, have seen with their own eyes what
is to be done before that place can be purify. Remember that we are in
terrible straits. If the Count escape us this time--and he is strong and
subtle and cunning--he may choose to sleep him for a century, and then
in time our dear one"--he took my hand--"would come to him to keep him
company, and would be as those others that you, Jonathan, saw. You have
told us of their gloating lips; you heard their ribald laugh as they
clutched the moving bag that the Count threw to them. You shudder; and
well may it be. Forgive me that I make you so much pain, but it is
necessary. My friend, is it not a dire need for the which I am giving,
possibly my life? If it were that any one went into that place to stay,
it is I who would have to go to keep them company."

"Do as you will," said Jonathan, with a sob that shook him all over, "we
are in the hands of God!"

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Oh, it did me good to see the way that these brave men worked.
How can women help loving men when they are so earnest, and so true, and
so brave! And, too, it made me think of the wonderful power of money!
What can it not do when it is properly applied; and what might it do
when basely used. I felt so thankful that Lord Godalming is rich, and
that both he and Mr. Morris, who also has plenty of money, are willing
to spend it so freely. For if they did not, our little expedition could
not start, either so promptly or so well equipped, as it will within
another hour. It is not three hours since it was arranged what part each
of us was to do; and now Lord Godalming and Jonathan have a lovely steam
launch, with steam up ready to start at a moment's notice. Dr. Seward
and Mr. Morris have half a dozen good horses, well appointed. We have
all the maps and appliances of various kinds that can be had. Professor
Van Helsing and I are to leave by the 11:40 train to-night for Veresti,
where we are to get a carriage to drive to the Borgo Pass. We are
bringing a good deal of ready money, as we are to buy a carriage and
horses. We shall drive ourselves, for we have no one whom we can trust
in the matter. The Professor knows something of a great many languages,
so we shall get on all right. We have all got arms, even for me a
large-bore revolver; Jonathan would not be happy unless I was armed like
the rest. Alas! I cannot carry one arm that the rest do; the scar on my
forehead forbids that. Dear Dr. Van Helsing comforts me by telling me
that I am fully armed as there may be wolves; the weather is getting
colder every hour, and there are snow-flurries which come and go as
warnings.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--It took all my courage to say good-bye to my darling. We may
never meet again. Courage, Mina! the Professor is looking at you keenly;
his look is a warning. There must be no tears now--unless it may be that
God will let them fall in gladness.


_Jonathan Harker's Journal._

_October 30. Night._--I am writing this in the light from the furnace
door of the steam launch: Lord Godalming is firing up. He is an
experienced hand at the work, as he has had for years a launch of his
own on the Thames, and another on the Norfolk Broads. Regarding our
plans, we finally decided that Mina's guess was correct, and that if any
waterway was chosen for the Count's escape back to his Castle, the
Sereth and then the Bistritza at its junction, would be the one. We took
it, that somewhere about the 47th degree, north latitude, would be the
place chosen for the crossing the country between the river and the
Carpathians. We have no fear in running at good speed up the river at
night; there is plenty of water, and the banks are wide enough apart to
make steaming, even in the dark, easy enough. Lord Godalming tells me to
sleep for a while, as it is enough for the present for one to be on
watch. But I cannot sleep--how can I with the terrible danger hanging
over my darling, and her going out into that awful place.... My only
comfort is that we are in the hands of God. Only for that faith it would
be easier to die than to live, and so be quit of all the trouble. Mr.
Morris and Dr. Seward were off on their long ride before we started;
they are to keep up the right bank, far enough off to get on higher
lands where they can see a good stretch of river and avoid the following
of its curves. They have, for the first stages, two men to ride and lead
their spare horses--four in all, so as not to excite curiosity. When
they dismiss the men, which shall be shortly, they shall themselves look
after the horses. It may be necessary for us to join forces; if so they
can mount our whole party. One of the saddles has a movable horn, and
can be easily adapted for Mina, if required.

It is a wild adventure we are on. Here, as we are rushing along through
the darkness, with the cold from the river seeming to rise up and strike
us; with all the mysterious voices of the night around us, it all comes
home. We seem to be drifting into unknown places and unknown ways; into
a whole world of dark and dreadful things. Godalming is shutting the
furnace door....

       *       *       *       *       *

_31 October._--Still hurrying along. The day has come, and Godalming is
sleeping. I am on watch. The morning is bitterly cold; the furnace heat
is grateful, though we have heavy fur coats. As yet we have passed only
a few open boats, but none of them had on board any box or package of
anything like the size of the one we seek. The men were scared every
time we turned our electric lamp on them, and fell on their knees and
prayed.

       *       *       *       *       *

_1 November, evening._--No news all day; we have found nothing of the
kind we seek. We have now passed into the Bistritza; and if we are wrong
in our surmise our chance is gone. We have over-hauled every boat, big
and little. Early this morning, one crew took us for a Government boat,
and treated us accordingly. We saw in this a way of smoothing matters,
so at Fundu, where the Bistritza runs into the Sereth, we got a
Roumanian flag which we now fly conspicuously. With every boat which we
have over-hauled since then this trick has succeeded; we have had every
deference shown to us, and not once any objection to whatever we chose
to ask or do. Some of the Slovaks tell us that a big boat passed them,
going at more than usual speed as she had a double crew on board. This
was before they came to Fundu, so they could not tell us whether the
boat turned into the Bistritza or continued on up the Sereth. At Fundu
we could not hear of any such boat, so she must have passed there in the
night. I am feeling very sleepy; the cold is perhaps beginning to tell
upon me, and nature must have rest some time. Godalming insists that he
shall keep the first watch. God bless him for all his goodness to poor
dear Mina and me.

       *       *       *       *       *

_2 November, morning._--It is broad daylight. That good fellow would not
wake me. He says it would have been a sin to, for I slept peacefully and
was forgetting my trouble. It seems brutally selfish to me to have slept
so long, and let him watch all night; but he was quite right. I am a new
man this morning; and, as I sit here and watch him sleeping, I can do
all that is necessary both as to minding the engine, steering, and
keeping watch. I can feel that my strength and energy are coming back to
me. I wonder where Mina is now, and Van Helsing. They should have got to
Veresti about noon on Wednesday. It would take them some time to get the
carriage and horses; so if they had started and travelled hard, they
would be about now at the Borgo Pass. God guide and help them! I am
afraid to think what may happen. If we could only go faster! but we
cannot; the engines are throbbing and doing their utmost. I wonder how
Dr. Seward and Mr. Morris are getting on. There seem to be endless
streams running down the mountains into this river, but as none of them
are very large--at present, at all events, though they are terrible
doubtless in winter and when the snow melts--the horsemen may not have
met much obstruction. I hope that before we get to Strasba we may see
them; for if by that time we have not overtaken the Count, it may be
necessary to take counsel together what to do next.


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_2 November._--Three days on the road. No news, and no time to write it
if there had been, for every moment is precious. We have had only the
rest needful for the horses; but we are both bearing it wonderfully.
Those adventurous days of ours are turning up useful. We must push on;
we shall never feel happy till we get the launch in sight again.

       *       *       *       *       *

_3 November._--We heard at Fundu that the launch had gone up the
Bistritza. I wish it wasn't so cold. There are signs of snow coming; and
if it falls heavy it will stop us. In such case we must get a sledge and
go on, Russian fashion.

       *       *       *       *       *

_4 November._--To-day we heard of the launch having been detained by an
accident when trying to force a way up the rapids. The Slovak boats get
up all right, by aid of a rope and steering with knowledge. Some went up
only a few hours before. Godalming is an amateur fitter himself, and
evidently it was he who put the launch in trim again. Finally, they got
up the rapids all right, with local help, and are off on the chase
afresh. I fear that the boat is not any better for the accident; the
peasantry tell us that after she got upon smooth water again, she kept
stopping every now and again so long as she was in sight. We must push
on harder than ever; our help may be wanted soon.


_Mina Harker's Journal._

_31 October._--Arrived at Veresti at noon. The Professor tells me that
this morning at dawn he could hardly hypnotise me at all, and that all I
could say was: "dark and quiet." He is off now buying a carriage and
horses. He says that he will later on try to buy additional horses, so
that we may be able to change them on the way. We have something more
than 70 miles before us. The country is lovely, and most interesting; if
only we were under different conditions, how delightful it would be to
see it all. If Jonathan and I were driving through it alone what a
pleasure it would be. To stop and see people, and learn something of
their life, and to fill our minds and memories with all the colour and
picturesqueness of the whole wild, beautiful country and the quaint
people! But, alas!--

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Dr. Van Helsing has returned. He has got the carriage and
horses; we are to have some dinner, and to start in an hour. The
landlady is putting us up a huge basket of provisions; it seems enough
for a company of soldiers. The Professor encourages her, and whispers to
me that it may be a week before we can get any good food again. He has
been shopping too, and has sent home such a wonderful lot of fur coats
and wraps, and all sorts of warm things. There will not be any chance of
our being cold.

       *       *       *       *       *

We shall soon be off. I am afraid to think what may happen to us. We are
truly in the hands of God. He alone knows what may be, and I pray Him,
with all the strength of my sad and humble soul, that He will watch over
my beloved husband; that whatever may happen, Jonathan may know that I
loved him and honoured him more than I can say, and that my latest and
truest thought will be always for him.




CHAPTER XXVII

MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL


_1 November._--All day long we have travelled, and at a good speed. The
horses seem to know that they are being kindly treated, for they go
willingly their full stage at best speed. We have now had so many
changes and find the same thing so constantly that we are encouraged to
think that the journey will be an easy one. Dr. Van Helsing is laconic;
he tells the farmers that he is hurrying to Bistritz, and pays them well
to make the exchange of horses. We get hot soup, or coffee, or tea; and
off we go. It is a lovely country; full of beauties of all imaginable
kinds, and the people are brave, and strong, and simple, and seem full
of nice qualities. They are _very, very_ superstitious. In the first
house where we stopped, when the woman who served us saw the scar on my
forehead, she crossed herself and put out two fingers towards me, to
keep off the evil eye. I believe they went to the trouble of putting an
extra amount of garlic into our food; and I can't abide garlic. Ever
since then I have taken care not to take off my hat or veil, and so have
escaped their suspicions. We are travelling fast, and as we have no
driver with us to carry tales, we go ahead of scandal; but I daresay
that fear of the evil eye will follow hard behind us all the way. The
Professor seems tireless; all day he would not take any rest, though he
made me sleep for a long spell. At sunset time he hypnotised me, and he
says that I answered as usual "darkness, lapping water and creaking
wood"; so our enemy is still on the river. I am afraid to think of
Jonathan, but somehow I have now no fear for him, or for myself. I write
this whilst we wait in a farmhouse for the horses to be got ready. Dr.
Van Helsing is sleeping, Poor dear, he looks very tired and old and
grey, but his mouth is set as firmly as a conqueror's; even in his sleep
he is instinct with resolution. When we have well started I must make
him rest whilst I drive. I shall tell him that we have days before us,
and we must not break down when most of all his strength will be
needed.... All is ready; we are off shortly.

       *       *       *       *       *

_2 November, morning._--I was successful, and we took turns driving all
night; now the day is on us, bright though cold. There is a strange
heaviness in the air--I say heaviness for want of a better word; I mean
that it oppresses us both. It is very cold, and only our warm furs keep
us comfortable. At dawn Van Helsing hypnotised me; he says I answered
"darkness, creaking wood and roaring water," so the river is changing as
they ascend. I do hope that my darling will not run any chance of
danger--more than need be; but we are in God's hands.

       *       *       *       *       *

_2 November, night._--All day long driving. The country gets wilder as
we go, and the great spurs of the Carpathians, which at Veresti seemed
so far from us and so low on the horizon, now seem to gather round us
and tower in front. We both seem in good spirits; I think we make an
effort each to cheer the other; in the doing so we cheer ourselves. Dr.
Van Helsing says that by morning we shall reach the Borgo Pass. The
houses are very few here now, and the Professor says that the last horse
we got will have to go on with us, as we may not be able to change. He
got two in addition to the two we changed, so that now we have a rude
four-in-hand. The dear horses are patient and good, and they give us no
trouble. We are not worried with other travellers, and so even I can
drive. We shall get to the Pass in daylight; we do not want to arrive
before. So we take it easy, and have each a long rest in turn. Oh, what
will to-morrow bring to us? We go to seek the place where my poor
darling suffered so much. God grant that we may be guided aright, and
that He will deign to watch over my husband and those dear to us both,
and who are in such deadly peril. As for me, I am not worthy in His
sight. Alas! I am unclean to His eyes, and shall be until He may deign
to let me stand forth in His sight as one of those who have not incurred
His wrath.


_Memorandum by Abraham Van Helsing._

_4 November._--This to my old and true friend John Seward, M.D., of
Purfleet, London, in case I may not see him. It may explain. It is
morning, and I write by a fire which all the night I have kept
alive--Madam Mina aiding me. It is cold, cold; so cold that the grey
heavy sky is full of snow, which when it falls will settle for all
winter as the ground is hardening to receive it. It seems to have
affected Madam Mina; she has been so heavy of head all day that she was
not like herself. She sleeps, and sleeps, and sleeps! She who is usual
so alert, have done literally nothing all the day; she even have lost
her appetite. She make no entry into her little diary, she who write so
faithful at every pause. Something whisper to me that all is not well.
However, to-night she is more _vif_. Her long sleep all day have refresh
and restore her, for now she is all sweet and bright as ever. At sunset
I try to hypnotise her, but alas! with no effect; the power has grown
less and less with each day, and to-night it fail me altogether. Well,
God's will be done--whatever it may be, and whithersoever it may lead!

Now to the historical, for as Madam Mina write not in her stenography, I
must, in my cumbrous old fashion, that so each day of us may not go
unrecorded.

We got to the Borgo Pass just after sunrise yesterday morning. When I
saw the signs of the dawn I got ready for the hypnotism. We stopped our
carriage, and got down so that there might be no disturbance. I made a
couch with furs, and Madam Mina, lying down, yield herself as usual, but
more slow and more short time than ever, to the hypnotic sleep. As
before, came the answer: "darkness and the swirling of water." Then she
woke, bright and radiant and we go on our way and soon reach the Pass.
At this time and place, she become all on fire with zeal; some new
guiding power be in her manifested, for she point to a road and say:--

"This is the way."

"How know you it?" I ask.

"Of course I know it," she answer, and with a pause, add: "Have not my
Jonathan travelled it and wrote of his travel?"

At first I think somewhat strange, but soon I see that there be only one
such by-road. It is used but little, and very different from the coach
road from the Bukovina to Bistritz, which is more wide and hard, and
more of use.

So we came down this road; when we meet other ways--not always were we
sure that they were roads at all, for they be neglect and light snow
have fallen--the horses know and they only. I give rein to them, and
they go on so patient. By-and-by we find all the things which Jonathan
have note in that wonderful diary of him. Then we go on for long, long
hours and hours. At the first, I tell Madam Mina to sleep; she try, and
she succeed. She sleep all the time; till at the last, I feel myself to
suspicious grow, and attempt to wake her. But she sleep on, and I may
not wake her though I try. I do not wish to try too hard lest I harm
her; for I know that she have suffer much, and sleep at times be
all-in-all to her. I think I drowse myself, for all of sudden I feel
guilt, as though I have done something; I find myself bolt up, with the
reins in my hand, and the good horses go along jog, jog, just as ever. I
look down and find Madam Mina still sleep. It is now not far off sunset
time, and over the snow the light of the sun flow in big yellow flood,
so that we throw great long shadow on where the mountain rise so steep.
For we are going up, and up; and all is oh! so wild and rocky, as though
it were the end of the world.

Then I arouse Madam Mina. This time she wake with not much trouble, and
then I try to put her to hypnotic sleep. But she sleep not, being as
though I were not. Still I try and try, till all at once I find her and
myself in dark; so I look round, and find that the sun have gone down.
Madam Mina laugh, and I turn and look at her. She is now quite awake,
and look so well as I never saw her since that night at Carfax when we
first enter the Count's house. I am amaze, and not at ease then; but she
is so bright and tender and thoughtful for me that I forget all fear. I
light a fire, for we have brought supply of wood with us, and she
prepare food while I undo the horses and set them, tethered in shelter,
to feed. Then when I return to the fire she have my supper ready. I go
to help her; but she smile, and tell me that she have eat already--that
she was so hungry that she would not wait. I like it not, and I have
grave doubts; but I fear to affright her, and so I am silent of it. She
help me and I eat alone; and then we wrap in fur and lie beside the
fire, and I tell her to sleep while I watch. But presently I forget all
of watching; and when I sudden remember that I watch, I find her lying
quiet, but awake, and looking at me with so bright eyes. Once, twice
more the same occur, and I get much sleep till before morning. When I
wake I try to hypnotise her; but alas! though she shut her eyes
obedient, she may not sleep. The sun rise up, and up, and up; and then
sleep come to her too late, but so heavy that she will not wake. I have
to lift her up, and place her sleeping in the carriage when I have
harnessed the horses and made all ready. Madam still sleep, and she look
in her sleep more healthy and more redder than before. And I like it
not. And I am afraid, afraid, afraid!--I am afraid of all things--even
to think but I must go on my way. The stake we play for is life and
death, or more than these, and we must not flinch.

       *       *       *       *       *

_5 November, morning._--Let me be accurate in everything, for though you
and I have seen some strange things together, you may at the first think
that I, Van Helsing, am mad--that the many horrors and the so long
strain on nerves has at the last turn my brain.

All yesterday we travel, ever getting closer to the mountains, and
moving into a more and more wild and desert land. There are great,
frowning precipices and much falling water, and Nature seem to have held
sometime her carnival. Madam Mina still sleep and sleep; and though I
did have hunger and appeased it, I could not waken her--even for food. I
began to fear that the fatal spell of the place was upon her, tainted as
she is with that Vampire baptism. "Well," said I to myself, "if it be
that she sleep all the day, it shall also be that I do not sleep at
night." As we travel on the rough road, for a road of an ancient and
imperfect kind there was, I held down my head and slept. Again I waked
with a sense of guilt and of time passed, and found Madam Mina still
sleeping, and the sun low down. But all was indeed changed; the frowning
mountains seemed further away, and we were near the top of a
steep-rising hill, on summit of which was such a castle as Jonathan tell
of in his diary. At once I exulted and feared; for now, for good or ill,
the end was near.

I woke Madam Mina, and again tried to hypnotise her; but alas!
unavailing till too late. Then, ere the great dark came upon us--for
even after down-sun the heavens reflected the gone sun on the snow, and
all was for a time in a great twilight--I took out the horses and fed
them in what shelter I could. Then I make a fire; and near it I make
Madam Mina, now awake and more charming than ever, sit comfortable amid
her rugs. I got ready food: but she would not eat, simply saying that
she had not hunger. I did not press her, knowing her unavailingness. But
I myself eat, for I must needs now be strong for all. Then, with the
fear on me of what might be, I drew a ring so big for her comfort, round
where Madam Mina sat; and over the ring I passed some of the wafer, and
I broke it fine so that all was well guarded. She sat still all the
time--so still as one dead; and she grew whiter and ever whiter till the
snow was not more pale; and no word she said. But when I drew near, she
clung to me, and I could know that the poor soul shook her from head to
feet with a tremor that was pain to feel. I said to her presently, when
she had grown more quiet:--

"Will you not come over to the fire?" for I wished to make a test of
what she could. She rose obedient, but when she have made a step she
stopped, and stood as one stricken.

"Why not go on?" I asked. She shook her head, and, coming back, sat
down in her place. Then, looking at me with open eyes, as of one waked
from sleep, she said simply:--

"I cannot!" and remained silent. I rejoiced, for I knew that what she
could not, none of those that we dreaded could. Though there might be
danger to her body, yet her soul was safe!

Presently the horses began to scream, and tore at their tethers till I
came to them and quieted them. When they did feel my hands on them, they
whinnied low as in joy, and licked at my hands and were quiet for a
time. Many times through the night did I come to them, till it arrive to
the cold hour when all nature is at lowest; and every time my coming was
with quiet of them. In the cold hour the fire began to die, and I was
about stepping forth to replenish it, for now the snow came in flying
sweeps and with it a chill mist. Even in the dark there was a light of
some kind, as there ever is over snow; and it seemed as though the
snow-flurries and the wreaths of mist took shape as of women with
trailing garments. All was in dead, grim silence only that the horses
whinnied and cowered, as if in terror of the worst. I began to
fear--horrible fears; but then came to me the sense of safety in that
ring wherein I stood. I began, too, to think that my imaginings were of
the night, and the gloom, and the unrest that I have gone through, and
all the terrible anxiety. It was as though my memories of all Jonathan's
horrid experience were befooling me; for the snow flakes and the mist
began to wheel and circle round, till I could get as though a shadowy
glimpse of those women that would have kissed him. And then the horses
cowered lower and lower, and moaned in terror as men do in pain. Even
the madness of fright was not to them, so that they could break away. I
feared for my dear Madam Mina when these weird figures drew near and
circled round. I looked at her, but she sat calm, and smiled at me; when
I would have stepped to the fire to replenish it, she caught me and held
me back, and whispered, like a voice that one hears in a dream, so low
it was:--

"No! No! Do not go without. Here you are safe!" I turned to her, and
looking in her eyes, said:--

"But you? It is for you that I fear!" whereat she laughed--a laugh, low
and unreal, and said:--

"Fear for _me_! Why fear for me? None safer in all the world from them
than I am," and as I wondered at the meaning of her words, a puff of
wind made the flame leap up, and I see the red scar on her forehead.
Then, alas! I knew. Did I not, I would soon have learned, for the
wheeling figures of mist and snow came closer, but keeping ever without
the Holy circle. Then they began to materialise till--if God have not
take away my reason, for I saw it through my eyes--there were before me
in actual flesh the same three women that Jonathan saw in the room, when
they would have kissed his throat. I knew the swaying round forms, the
bright hard eyes, the white teeth, the ruddy colour, the voluptuous
lips. They smiled ever at poor dear Madam Mina; and as their laugh came
through the silence of the night, they twined their arms and pointed to
her, and said in those so sweet tingling tones that Jonathan said were
of the intolerable sweetness of the water-glasses:--

"Come, sister. Come to us. Come! Come!" In fear I turned to my poor
Madam Mina, and my heart with gladness leapt like flame; for oh! the
terror in her sweet eyes, the repulsion, the horror, told a story to my
heart that was all of hope. God be thanked she was not, yet, of them. I
seized some of the firewood which was by me, and holding out some of the
Wafer, advanced on them towards the fire. They drew back before me, and
laughed their low horrid laugh. I fed the fire, and feared them not; for
I knew that we were safe within our protections. They could not
approach, me, whilst so armed, nor Madam Mina whilst she remained within
the ring, which she could not leave no more than they could enter. The
horses had ceased to moan, and lay still on the ground; the snow fell on
them softly, and they grew whiter. I knew that there was for the poor
beasts no more of terror.

And so we remained till the red of the dawn to fall through the
snow-gloom. I was desolate and afraid, and full of woe and terror; but
when that beautiful sun began to climb the horizon life was to me again.
At the first coming of the dawn the horrid figures melted in the
whirling mist and snow; the wreaths of transparent gloom moved away
towards the castle, and were lost.

Instinctively, with the dawn coming, I turned to Madam Mina, intending
to hypnotise her; but she lay in a deep and sudden sleep, from which I
could not wake her. I tried to hypnotise through her sleep, but she made
no response, none at all; and the day broke. I fear yet to stir. I have
made my fire and have seen the horses, they are all dead. To-day I have
much to do here, and I keep waiting till the sun is up high; for there
may be places where I must go, where that sunlight, though snow and mist
obscure it, will be to me a safety.

I will strengthen me with breakfast, and then I will to my terrible
work. Madam Mina still sleeps; and, God be thanked! she is calm in her
sleep....


_Jonathan Harker's Journal._

_4 November, evening._--The accident to the launch has been a terrible
thing for us. Only for it we should have overtaken the boat long ago;
and by now my dear Mina would have been free. I fear to think of her,
off on the wolds near that horrid place. We have got horses, and we
follow on the track. I note this whilst Godalming is getting ready. We
have our arms. The Szgany must look out if they mean fight. Oh, if only
Morris and Seward were with us. We must only hope! If I write no more
Good-bye, Mina! God bless and keep you.


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_5 November._--With the dawn we saw the body of Szgany before us dashing
away from the river with their leiter-wagon. They surrounded it in a
cluster, and hurried along as though beset. The snow is falling lightly
and there is a strange excitement in the air. It may be our own
feelings, but the depression is strange. Far off I hear the howling of
wolves; the snow brings them down from the mountains, and there are
dangers to all of us, and from all sides. The horses are nearly ready,
and we are soon off. We ride to death of some one. God alone knows who,
or where, or what, or when, or how it may be....


_Dr. Van Helsing's Memorandum._

_5 November, afternoon._--I am at least sane. Thank God for that mercy
at all events, though the proving it has been dreadful. When I left
Madam Mina sleeping within the Holy circle, I took my way to the castle.
The blacksmith hammer which I took in the carriage from Veresti was
useful; though the doors were all open I broke them off the rusty
hinges, lest some ill-intent or ill-chance should close them, so that
being entered I might not get out. Jonathan's bitter experience served
me here. By memory of his diary I found my way to the old chapel, for I
knew that here my work lay. The air was oppressive; it seemed as if
there was some sulphurous fume, which at times made me dizzy. Either
there was a roaring in my ears or I heard afar off the howl of wolves.
Then I bethought me of my dear Madam Mina, and I was in terrible plight.
The dilemma had me between his horns.

Her, I had not dare to take into this place, but left safe from the
Vampire in that Holy circle; and yet even there would be the wolf! I
resolve me that my work lay here, and that as to the wolves we must
submit, if it were God's will. At any rate it was only death and
freedom beyond. So did I choose for her. Had it but been for myself the
choice had been easy, the maw of the wolf were better to rest in than
the grave of the Vampire! So I make my choice to go on with my work.

I knew that there were at least three graves to find--graves that are
inhabit; so I search, and search, and I find one of them. She lay in her
Vampire sleep, so full of life and voluptuous beauty that I shudder as
though I have come to do murder. Ah, I doubt not that in old time, when
such things were, many a man who set forth to do such a task as mine,
found at the last his heart fail him, and then his nerve. So he delay,
and delay, and delay, till the mere beauty and the fascination of the
wanton Un-Dead have hypnotise him; and he remain on and on, till sunset
come, and the Vampire sleep be over. Then the beautiful eyes of the fair
woman open and look love, and the voluptuous mouth present to a
kiss--and man is weak. And there remain one more victim in the Vampire
fold; one more to swell the grim and grisly ranks of the Un-Dead!...

There is some fascination, surely, when I am moved by the mere presence
of such an one, even lying as she lay in a tomb fretted with age and
heavy with the dust of centuries, though there be that horrid odour such
as the lairs of the Count have had. Yes, I was moved--I, Van Helsing,
with all my purpose and with my motive for hate--I was moved to a
yearning for delay which seemed to paralyse my faculties and to clog my
very soul. It may have been that the need of natural sleep, and the
strange oppression of the air were beginning to overcome me. Certain it
was that I was lapsing into sleep, the open-eyed sleep of one who yields
to a sweet fascination, when there came through the snow-stilled air a
long, low wail, so full of woe and pity that it woke me like the sound
of a clarion. For it was the voice of my dear Madam Mina that I heard.

Then I braced myself again to my horrid task, and found by wrenching
away tomb-tops one other of the sisters, the other dark one. I dared not
pause to look on her as I had on her sister, lest once more I should
begin to be enthrall; but I go on searching until, presently, I find in
a high great tomb as if made to one much beloved that other fair sister
which, like Jonathan I had seen to gather herself out of the atoms of
the mist. She was so fair to look on, so radiantly beautiful, so
exquisitely voluptuous, that the very instinct of man in me, which calls
some of my sex to love and to protect one of hers, made my head whirl
with new emotion. But God be thanked, that soul-wail of my dear Madam
Mina had not died out of my ears; and, before the spell could be wrought
further upon me, I had nerved myself to my wild work. By this time I had
searched all the tombs in the chapel, so far as I could tell; and as
there had been only three of these Un-Dead phantoms around us in the
night, I took it that there were no more of active Un-Dead existent.
There was one great tomb more lordly than all the rest; huge it was, and
nobly proportioned. On it was but one word

                                DRACULA.

This then was the Un-Dead home of the King-Vampire, to whom so many more
were due. Its emptiness spoke eloquent to make certain what I knew.
Before I began to restore these women to their dead selves through my
awful work, I laid in Dracula's tomb some of the Wafer, and so banished
him from it, Un-Dead, for ever.

Then began my terrible task, and I dreaded it. Had it been but one, it
had been easy, comparative. But three! To begin twice more after I had
been through a deed of horror; for if it was terrible with the sweet
Miss Lucy, what would it not be with these strange ones who had survived
through centuries, and who had been strengthened by the passing of the
years; who would, if they could, have fought for their foul lives....

Oh, my friend John, but it was butcher work; had I not been nerved by
thoughts of other dead, and of the living over whom hung such a pall of
fear, I could not have gone on. I tremble and tremble even yet, though
till all was over, God be thanked, my nerve did stand. Had I not seen
the repose in the first place, and the gladness that stole over it just
ere the final dissolution came, as realisation that the soul had been
won, I could not have gone further with my butchery. I could not have
endured the horrid screeching as the stake drove home; the plunging of
writhing form, and lips of bloody foam. I should have fled in terror and
left my work undone. But it is over! And the poor souls, I can pity them
now and weep, as I think of them placid each in her full sleep of death
for a short moment ere fading. For, friend John, hardly had my knife
severed the head of each, before the whole body began to melt away and
crumble in to its native dust, as though the death that should have come
centuries agone had at last assert himself and say at once and loud "I
am here!"

Before I left the castle I so fixed its entrances that never more can
the Count enter there Un-Dead.

When I stepped into the circle where Madam Mina slept, she woke from her
sleep, and, seeing, me, cried out in pain that I had endured too much.

"Come!" she said, "come away from this awful place! Let us go to meet my
husband who is, I know, coming towards us." She was looking thin and
pale and weak; but her eyes were pure and glowed with fervour. I was
glad to see her paleness and her illness, for my mind was full of the
fresh horror of that ruddy vampire sleep.

And so with trust and hope, and yet full of fear, we go eastward to meet
our friends--and _him_--whom Madam Mina tell me that she _know_ are
coming to meet us.


_Mina Harker's Journal._

_6 November._--It was late in the afternoon when the Professor and I
took our way towards the east whence I knew Jonathan was coming. We did
not go fast, though the way was steeply downhill, for we had to take
heavy rugs and wraps with us; we dared not face the possibility of being
left without warmth in the cold and the snow. We had to take some of our
provisions, too, for we were in a perfect desolation, and, so far as we
could see through the snowfall, there was not even the sign of
habitation. When we had gone about a mile, I was tired with the heavy
walking and sat down to rest. Then we looked back and saw where the
clear line of Dracula's castle cut the sky; for we were so deep under
the hill whereon it was set that the angle of perspective of the
Carpathian mountains was far below it. We saw it in all its grandeur,
perched a thousand feet on the summit of a sheer precipice, and with
seemingly a great gap between it and the steep of the adjacent mountain
on any side. There was something wild and uncanny about the place. We
could hear the distant howling of wolves. They were far off, but the
sound, even though coming muffled through the deadening snowfall, was
full of terror. I knew from the way Dr. Van Helsing was searching about
that he was trying to seek some strategic point, where we would be less
exposed in case of attack. The rough roadway still led downwards; we
could trace it through the drifted snow.

In a little while the Professor signalled to me, so I got up and joined
him. He had found a wonderful spot, a sort of natural hollow in a rock,
with an entrance like a doorway between two boulders. He took me by the
hand and drew me in: "See!" he said, "here you will be in shelter; and
if the wolves do come I can meet them one by one." He brought in our
furs, and made a snug nest for me, and got out some provisions and
forced them upon me. But I could not eat; to even try to do so was
repulsive to me, and, much as I would have liked to please him, I could
not bring myself to the attempt. He looked very sad, but did not
reproach me. Taking his field-glasses from the case, he stood on the top
of the rock, and began to search the horizon. Suddenly he called out:--

"Look! Madam Mina, look! look!" I sprang up and stood beside him on the
rock; he handed me his glasses and pointed. The snow was now falling
more heavily, and swirled about fiercely, for a high wind was beginning
to blow. However, there were times when there were pauses between the
snow flurries and I could see a long way round. From the height where we
were it was possible to see a great distance; and far off, beyond the
white waste of snow, I could see the river lying like a black ribbon in
kinks and curls as it wound its way. Straight in front of us and not far
off--in fact, so near that I wondered we had not noticed before--came a
group of mounted men hurrying along. In the midst of them was a cart, a
long leiter-wagon which swept from side to side, like a dog's tail
wagging, with each stern inequality of the road. Outlined against the
snow as they were, I could see from the men's clothes that they were
peasants or gypsies of some kind.

On the cart was a great square chest. My heart leaped as I saw it, for I
felt that the end was coming. The evening was now drawing close, and
well I knew that at sunset the Thing, which was till then imprisoned
there, would take new freedom and could in any of many forms elude all
pursuit. In fear I turned to the Professor; to my consternation,
however, he was not there. An instant later, I saw him below me. Round
the rock he had drawn a circle, such as we had found shelter in last
night. When he had completed it he stood beside me again, saying:--

"At least you shall be safe here from _him_!" He took the glasses from
me, and at the next lull of the snow swept the whole space below us.
"See," he said, "they come quickly; they are flogging the horses, and
galloping as hard as they can." He paused and went on in a hollow
voice:--

"They are racing for the sunset. We may be too late. God's will be
done!" Down came another blinding rush of driving snow, and the whole
landscape was blotted out. It soon passed, however, and once more his
glasses were fixed on the plain. Then came a sudden cry:--

"Look! Look! Look! See, two horsemen follow fast, coming up from the
south. It must be Quincey and John. Take the glass. Look before the snow
blots it all out!" I took it and looked. The two men might be Dr. Seward
and Mr. Morris. I knew at all events that neither of them was Jonathan.
At the same time I _knew_ that Jonathan was not far off; looking around
I saw on the north side of the coming party two other men, riding at
break-neck speed. One of them I knew was Jonathan, and the other I took,
of course, to be Lord Godalming. They, too, were pursuing the party with
the cart. When I told the Professor he shouted in glee like a schoolboy,
and, after looking intently till a snow fall made sight impossible, he
laid his Winchester rifle ready for use against the boulder at the
opening of our shelter. "They are all converging," he said. "When the
time comes we shall have gypsies on all sides." I got out my revolver
ready to hand, for whilst we were speaking the howling of wolves came
louder and closer. When the snow storm abated a moment we looked again.
It was strange to see the snow falling in such heavy flakes close to us,
and beyond, the sun shining more and more brightly as it sank down
towards the far mountain tops. Sweeping the glass all around us I could
see here and there dots moving singly and in twos and threes and larger
numbers--the wolves were gathering for their prey.

Every instant seemed an age whilst we waited. The wind came now in
fierce bursts, and the snow was driven with fury as it swept upon us in
circling eddies. At times we could not see an arm's length before us;
but at others, as the hollow-sounding wind swept by us, it seemed to
clear the air-space around us so that we could see afar off. We had of
late been so accustomed to watch for sunrise and sunset, that we knew
with fair accuracy when it would be; and we knew that before long the
sun would set. It was hard to believe that by our watches it was less
than an hour that we waited in that rocky shelter before the various
bodies began to converge close upon us. The wind came now with fiercer
and more bitter sweeps, and more steadily from the north. It seemingly
had driven the snow clouds from us, for, with only occasional bursts,
the snow fell. We could distinguish clearly the individuals of each
party, the pursued and the pursuers. Strangely enough those pursued did
not seem to realise, or at least to care, that they were pursued; they
seemed, however, to hasten with redoubled speed as the sun dropped lower
and lower on the mountain tops.

Closer and closer they drew. The Professor and I crouched down behind
our rock, and held our weapons ready; I could see that he was determined
that they should not pass. One and all were quite unaware of our
presence.

All at once two voices shouted out to: "Halt!" One was my Jonathan's,
raised in a high key of passion; the other Mr. Morris' strong resolute
tone of quiet command. The gypsies may not have known the language, but
there was no mistaking the tone, in whatever tongue the words were
spoken. Instinctively they reined in, and at the instant Lord Godalming
and Jonathan dashed up at one side and Dr. Seward and Mr. Morris on the
other. The leader of the gypsies, a splendid-looking fellow who sat his
horse like a centaur, waved them back, and in a fierce voice gave to his
companions some word to proceed. They lashed the horses which sprang
forward; but the four men raised their Winchester rifles, and in an
unmistakable way commanded them to stop. At the same moment Dr. Van
Helsing and I rose behind the rock and pointed our weapons at them.
Seeing that they were surrounded the men tightened their reins and drew
up. The leader turned to them and gave a word at which every man of the
gypsy party drew what weapon he carried, knife or pistol, and held
himself in readiness to attack. Issue was joined in an instant.

The leader, with a quick movement of his rein, threw his horse out in
front, and pointing first to the sun--now close down on the hill
tops--and then to the castle, said something which I did not understand.
For answer, all four men of our party threw themselves from their horses
and dashed towards the cart. I should have felt terrible fear at seeing
Jonathan in such danger, but that the ardour of battle must have been
upon me as well as the rest of them; I felt no fear, but only a wild,
surging desire to do something. Seeing the quick movement of our
parties, the leader of the gypsies gave a command; his men instantly
formed round the cart in a sort of undisciplined endeavour, each one
shouldering and pushing the other in his eagerness to carry out the
order.

In the midst of this I could see that Jonathan on one side of the ring
of men, and Quincey on the other, were forcing a way to the cart; it was
evident that they were bent on finishing their task before the sun
should set. Nothing seemed to stop or even to hinder them. Neither the
levelled weapons nor the flashing knives of the gypsies in front, nor
the howling of the wolves behind, appeared to even attract their
attention. Jonathan's impetuosity, and the manifest singleness of his
purpose, seemed to overawe those in front of him; instinctively they
cowered, aside and let him pass. In an instant he had jumped upon the
cart, and, with a strength which seemed incredible, raised the great
box, and flung it over the wheel to the ground. In the meantime, Mr.
Morris had had to use force to pass through his side of the ring of
Szgany. All the time I had been breathlessly watching Jonathan I had,
with the tail of my eye, seen him pressing desperately forward, and had
seen the knives of the gypsies flash as he won a way through them, and
they cut at him. He had parried with his great bowie knife, and at first
I thought that he too had come through in safety; but as he sprang
beside Jonathan, who had by now jumped from the cart, I could see that
with his left hand he was clutching at his side, and that the blood was
spurting through his fingers. He did not delay notwithstanding this, for
as Jonathan, with desperate energy, attacked one end of the chest,
attempting to prize off the lid with his great Kukri knife, he attacked
the other frantically with his bowie. Under the efforts of both men the
lid began to yield; the nails drew with a quick screeching sound, and
the top of the box was thrown back.

By this time the gypsies, seeing themselves covered by the Winchesters,
and at the mercy of Lord Godalming and Dr. Seward, had given in and made
no resistance. The sun was almost down on the mountain tops, and the
shadows of the whole group fell long upon the snow. I saw the Count
lying within the box upon the earth, some of which the rude falling from
the cart had scattered over him. He was deathly pale, just like a waxen
image, and the red eyes glared with the horrible vindictive look which I
knew too well.

As I looked, the eyes saw the sinking sun, and the look of hate in them
turned to triumph.

But, on the instant, came the sweep and flash of Jonathan's great knife.
I shrieked as I saw it shear through the throat; whilst at the same
moment Mr. Morris's bowie knife plunged into the heart.

It was like a miracle; but before our very eyes, and almost in the
drawing of a breath, the whole body crumble into dust and passed from
our sight.

I shall be glad as long as I live that even in that moment of final
dissolution, there was in the face a look of peace, such as I never
could have imagined might have rested there.

The Castle of Dracula now stood out against the red sky, and every stone
of its broken battlements was articulated against the light of the
setting sun.

The gypsies, taking us as in some way the cause of the extraordinary
disappearance of the dead man, turned, without a word, and rode away as
if for their lives. Those who were unmounted jumped upon the
leiter-wagon and shouted to the horsemen not to desert them. The wolves,
which had withdrawn to a safe distance, followed in their wake, leaving
us alone.

Mr. Morris, who had sunk to the ground, leaned on his elbow, holding his
hand pressed to his side; the blood still gushed through his fingers. I
flew to him, for the Holy circle did not now keep me back; so did the
two doctors. Jonathan knelt behind him and the wounded man laid back his
head on his shoulder. With a sigh he took, with a feeble effort, my hand
in that of his own which was unstained. He must have seen the anguish of
my heart in my face, for he smiled at me and said:--

"I am only too happy to have been of any service! Oh, God!" he cried
suddenly, struggling up to a sitting posture and pointing to me, "It was
worth for this to die! Look! look!"

The sun was now right down upon the mountain top, and the red gleams
fell upon my face, so that it was bathed in rosy light. With one impulse
the men sank on their knees and a deep and earnest "Amen" broke from all
as their eyes followed the pointing of his finger. The dying man
spoke:--

"Now God be thanked that all has not been in vain! See! the snow is not
more stainless than her forehead! The curse has passed away!"

And, to our bitter grief, with a smile and in silence, he died, a
gallant gentleman.




                                  NOTE


Seven years ago we all went through the flames; and the happiness of
some of us since then is, we think, well worth the pain we endured. It
is an added joy to Mina and to me that our boy's birthday is the same
day as that on which Quincey Morris died. His mother holds, I know, the
secret belief that some of our brave friend's spirit has passed into
him. His bundle of names links all our little band of men together; but
we call him Quincey.

In the summer of this year we made a journey to Transylvania, and went
over the old ground which was, and is, to us so full of vivid and
terrible memories. It was almost impossible to believe that the things
which we had seen with our own eyes and heard with our own ears were
living truths. Every trace of all that had been was blotted out. The
castle stood as before, reared high above a waste of desolation.

When we got home we were talking of the old time--which we could all
look back on without despair, for Godalming and Seward are both happily
married. I took the papers from the safe where they had been ever since
our return so long ago. We were struck with the fact, that in all the
mass of material of which the record is composed, there is hardly one
authentic document; nothing but a mass of typewriting, except the later
note-books of Mina and Seward and myself, and Van Helsing's memorandum.
We could hardly ask any one, even did we wish to, to accept these as
proofs of so wild a story. Van Helsing summed it all up as he said, with
our boy on his knee:--

"We want no proofs; we ask none to believe us! This boy will some day
know what a brave and gallant woman his mother is. Already he knows her
sweetness and loving care; later on he will understand how some men so
loved her, that they did dare much for her sake."

JONATHAN HARKER.

                                THE END

       *       *       *       *       *

                       _There's More to Follow!_

     More stories of the sort you like; more, probably, by the author of
     this one; more than 500 titles all told by writers of world-wide
     reputation, in the Authors' Alphabetical List which you will find
     on the _reverse side_ of the wrapper of this book. Look it over
     before you lay it aside. There are books here you are sure to
     want--some, possibly, that you have _always_ wanted.

     It is a _selected_ list; every book in it has achieved a certain
     measure of _success_.

     The Grosset & Dunlap list is not only the greatest Index of Good
     Fiction available, it represents in addition a generally accepted
     Standard of Value. It will pay you to

                _Look on the Other Side of the Wrapper!_

     _In case the wrapper is lost write to the publishers for a complete
     catalog_

       *       *       *       *       *

DETECTIVE STORIES BY J. S. FLETCHER

May be had wherever books are sold. Ask for Grosset & Dunlap's list


THE SECRET OF THE BARBICAN

THE ANNEXATION SOCIETY

THE WOLVES AND THE LAMB

GREEN INK

THE KING versus WARGRAVE

THE LOST MR. LINTHWAITE

THE MILL OF MANY WINDOWS

THE HEAVEN-KISSED HILL

THE MIDDLE TEMPLE MURDER

RAVENSDENE COURT

THE RAYNER-SLADE AMALGAMATION

THE SAFETY PIN

THE SECRET WAY

THE VALLEY OF HEADSTRONG MEN

_Ask for Complete free list of G. & D. Popular Copyrighted Fiction_

GROSSET & DUNLAP, _Publishers_, NEW YORK

       *       *       *       *       *

Typographical errors corrected by the etext transcriber:

in a very simply way=> in a very simple way {pg 68}

"The Westminister Gazette," 25 September.=> "The Westminster Gazette,"
25 September. {pg 165}

It have told him=> She must have told him {pg 169}

from md sight=> from my sight {pg}184

Goldaming=> Godalming {pg 226}

I I did not want to hinder him=> I did not want to hinder him {pg 267}

They lay in a sort of or-orderly=> They lay in a sort of orderly {pg
279}

Translyvania=> Transylvania {pg 294}

this mrrning from Dardanelles=> this morning from Dardanelles {pg 313}













The Trial
Franz Kafka

Translation Copyright (C) by David Wyllie
Translator contact email: dandelion@post.cz




Chapter One
Arrest - Conversation with Mrs. Grubach - Then Miss Bürstner

        Someone must have been telling lies about Josef K., he knew he had
done nothing wrong but, one morning, he was arrested.  Every day at
eight in the morning he was brought his breakfast by  Mrs. Grubach's
cook - Mrs. Grubach was his landlady - but today she didn't come.  That
had never happened before.  K. waited a little while, looked from his
pillow at the old woman who lived opposite and who was watching him with
an inquisitiveness quite unusual for her, and finally, both hungry and
disconcerted, rang the bell.  There was immediately a knock at the door
and a man entered.  He had never seen the man in this house before.  He
was slim but firmly built, his clothes were black and close-fitting,
with many folds and pockets, buckles and buttons and a belt, all of
which gave the impression of being very practical but without making it
very clear what they were actually for.  "Who are you?" asked K.,
sitting half upright in his bed.  The man, however, ignored the question
as if his arrival simply had to be accepted, and merely replied, "You
rang?"  "Anna should have brought me my breakfast," said K.  He tried to
work out who the man actually was, first in silence, just through
observation and by thinking about it, but the man didn't stay still to
be looked at for very long.  Instead he went over to the door, opened it
slightly, and said to someone who was clearly standing immediately
behind it, "He wants Anna to bring him his breakfast."  There was a
little laughter in the neighbouring room, it was not clear from the
sound of it whether there were several people laughing.  The strange man
could not have learned anything from it that he hadn't known already,
but now he said to K., as if making his report "It is not possible."
"It would be the first time that's happened," said K., as he jumped out
of bed and quickly pulled on his trousers.  "I want to see who that is
in the next room, and why it is that Mrs. Grubach has let me be
disturbed in this way."  It immediately occurred to him that he needn't
have said this out loud, and that he must to some extent have
acknowledged their authority by doing so, but that didn't seem important
to him at the time.  That, at least, is how the stranger took it, as he
said, "Don't you think you'd better stay where you are?"  "I want
neither to stay here nor to be spoken to by you until you've introduced
yourself."  "I meant it for your own good," said the stranger and opened
the door, this time without being asked.  The next room, which K.
entered more slowly than he had intended, looked at first glance exactly
the same as it had the previous evening.  It was Mrs. Grubach's living
room, over-filled with furniture, tablecloths, porcelain and
photographs.  Perhaps there was a little more space in there than usual
today, but if so it was not immediately obvious, especially as the main
difference was the presence of a man sitting by the open window with a
book from which he now looked up.  "You should have stayed in your room!
Didn't Franz tell you?"  "And what is it you want, then?" said K.,
looking back and forth between this new acquaintance and the one named
Franz, who had remained in the doorway.  Through the open window he
noticed the old woman again, who had come close to the window opposite
so that she could continue to see everything.  She was showing an
inquisitiveness that really made it seem like she was going senile. "I
want to see Mrs. Grubach ...," said K., making a movement as if tearing
himself away from the two men - even though they were standing well away
from him - and wanted to go.  "No," said the man at the window, who
threw his book down on a coffee table and stood up.  "You can't go away
when you're under arrest."  "That's how it seems," said K.  "And why am
I under arrest?" he then asked.  "That's something we're not allowed to
tell you.  Go into your room and wait there.  Proceedings are underway
and you'll learn about everything all in good time.  It's not really
part of my job to be friendly towards you like this, but I hope no-one,
apart from Franz, will hear about it, and he's been more friendly
towards you than he should have been, under the rules, himself.  If you
carry on having as much good luck as you have been with your arresting
officers then you can reckon on things going well with you."  K. wanted
to sit down, but then he saw that, apart from the chair by the window,
there was nowhere anywhere in the room where he could sit.  "You'll get
the chance to see for yourself how true all this is," said Franz and
both men then walked up to K.  They were significantly bigger than him,
especially the second man, who frequently slapped him on the shoulder.
The two of them felt K.'s nightshirt, and said he would now have to wear
one that was of much lower quality, but that they would keep the
nightshirt along with his other underclothes and return them to him if
his case turned out well.  "It's better for you if you give us the
things than if you leave them in the storeroom," they said.  "Things
have a tendency to go missing in the storeroom, and after a certain
amount of time they sell things off, whether the case involved has come
to an end or not.  And cases like this can last a long time, especially
the ones that have been coming up lately.  They'd give you the money
they got for them, but it wouldn't be very much as it's not what they're
offered for them when they sell them that counts, it's how much they get
slipped on the side, and things like that lose their value anyway when
they get passed on from hand to hand, year after year."  K. paid hardly
any attention to what they were saying, he did not place much value on
what he may have still possessed or on who decided what happened to
them.  It was much more important to him to get a clear understanding of
his position, but he could not think clearly while these people were
here, the second policeman's belly - and they could only be policemen -
looked friendly enough, sticking out towards him, but when K. looked up
and saw his dry, boney face it did not seem to fit with the body.   His
strong nose twisted to one side as if ignoring K. and sharing an
understanding with the other policeman.  What sort of people were these?
What were they talking about?  What office did they belong to?  K. was
living in a free country, after all, everywhere was at peace, all laws
were decent and were upheld, who was it who dared accost him in his own
home?  He was always inclined to take life as lightly as he could, to
cross bridges when he came to them, pay no heed for the future, even
when everything seemed under threat.  But here that did not seem the
right thing to do.  He could have taken it all as a joke, a big joke set
up by his colleagues at the bank for some unknown reason, or also
perhaps because today was his thirtieth birthday, it was all possible of
course, maybe all he had to do was laugh in the policemen's face in some
way and they would laugh with him, maybe they were tradesmen from the
corner of the street, they looked like they might be - but he was
nonetheless determined, ever since he first caught sight of the one
called Franz, not to lose any slight advantage he might have had over
these people.  There was a very slight risk that people would later say
he couldn't understand a joke, but - although he wasn't normally in the
habit of learning from experience - he might also have had a few
unimportant occasions in mind when, unlike his more cautious friends, he
had acted with no thought at all for what might follow and had been made
to suffer for it. He didn't want that to happen again, not this time at
least; if they were play-acting he would act along with them.

        He still had time.  "Allow me," he said, and hurried between the
two policemen through into his room.  "He seems sensible enough," he
heard them say behind him.  Once in his room, he quickly pulled open the
drawer of his writing desk, everything in it was very tidy but in his
agitation he was unable to find the identification documents he was
looking for straight away.  He finally found his bicycle permit and was
about to go back to the policemen with it when it seemed to him too
petty, so he carried on searching until he found his birth certificate.
Just as he got back in the adjoining room the door on the other side
opened and Mrs. Grubach was about to enter.  He only saw her for an
instant, for as soon as she recognised K. she was clearly embarrassed,
asked for forgiveness and disappeared, closing the door behind her very
carefully.  "Do come in," K. could have said just then. But now he stood
in the middle of the room with his papers in his hand and still looking
at the door which did not open again.  He stayed like that until he was
startled out of it by the shout of the policeman who sat at the little
table at the open window and, as K. now saw, was eating his breakfast.
"Why didn't she come in?" he asked.  "She's not allowed to," said the
big policeman.  "You're under arrest, aren't you."  "But how can I be
under arrest? And how come it's like this?"  "Now you're starting
again," said the policeman, dipping a piece of buttered bread in the
honeypot.  "We don't answer questions like that."  "You will have to
answer them," said K.  "Here are my identification papers, now show me
yours and I certainly want to see the arrest warrant."  "Oh, my God!"
said the policeman.  "In a position like yours, and you think you can
start giving orders, do you?  It won't do you any good to get us on the
wrong side, even if you think it will - we're probably more on your side
that anyone else you know!"  "That's true, you know, you'd better
believe it," said Franz, holding a cup of coffee in his hand which he
did not lift to his mouth but looked at K. in a way that was probably
meant to be full of meaning but could not actually be understood.  K.
found himself, without intending it, in a mute dialogue with Franz, but
then slapped his hand down on his papers and said, "Here are my identity
documents."  "And what do you want us to do about it?" replied the big
policeman, loudly.  "The way you're carrying on, it's worse than a
child. What is it you want?  Do you want to get this great, bloody trial
of yours over with quickly by talking about ID and arrest warrants with
us?  We're just coppers, that's all we are.  Junior officers like us
hardly know one end of an ID card from another, all we've got to do with
you is keep an eye on you for ten hours a day and get paid for it.
That's all we are.  Mind you, what we can do is make sure that the high
officials we work for find out just what sort of person it is they're
going to arrest, and why he should be arrested, before they issue the
warrant.  There's no mistake there.   Our authorities as far as I know,
and I only know the lowest grades, don't go out looking for guilt among
the public; it's the guilt that draws them out, like it says in the law,
and they have to send us police officers out.  That's the law. Where
d'you think there'd be any mistake there?"  "I don't know this law,"
said K.  "So much the worse for you, then," said the policeman.  "It's
probably exists only in your heads," said K., he wanted, in some way, to
insinuate his way into the thoughts of the policemen, to re-shape those
thoughts to his benefit or to make himself at home there.  But the
policeman just said dismissively, "You'll find out when it affects you."
Franz joined in, and said, "Look at this, Willem, he admits he doesn't
know the law and at the same time insists he's innocent."  "You're quite
right, but we can't get him to understand a thing," said the other.  K.
stopped talking with them; do I, he thought to himself, do I really have
to carry on getting tangled up with the chattering of base functionaries
like this? - and they admit themselves that they are of the lowest
position.  They're talking about things of which they don't have the
slightest understanding, anyway.  It's only because of their stupidity
that they're able to be so sure of themselves.  I just need  few words
with someone of the same social standing as myself and everything will
be incomparably clearer, much clearer than a long conversation with
these two can make it.  He walked up and down the free space in the room
a couple of times, across the street he could see the old woman who,
now, had pulled an old man, much older than herself, up to the window
and had her arms around him.  K. had to put an end to this display,
"Take me to your superior," he said.  "As soon as he wants to see you.
Not before," said the policeman, the one called Willem.  "And now my
advice to you," he added, "is to go into your room, stay calm, and wait
and see what's to be done with you.  If you take our advice, you won't
tire yourself out thinking about things to no purpose, you need to pull
yourself together as there's a lot that's going to required of you.
You've not behaved towards us the way we deserve after being so good to
you, you forget that we, whatever we are, we're still free men and
you're not, and that's quite an advantage.  But in spite of all that
we're still willing, if you've got the money, to go and get you some
breakfast from the café over the road."

        Without giving any answer to this offer, K. stood still for some
time.  Perhaps, if he opened the door of the next room or even the front
door, the two of them would not dare to stand in his way, perhaps that
would be the simplest way to settle the whole thing, by bringing it to a
head.  But maybe they would grab him, and if he were thrown down on the
ground he would lose all the advantage he, in a certain respect, had
over them.  So he decided on the more certain solution, the way things
would go in the natural course of events, and went back in his room
without another word either from him or from the policemen.

        He threw himself down on his bed, and from the dressing table he
took the nice apple that he had put there the previous evening for his
breakfast.   Now it was all the breakfast he had and anyway, as he
confirmed as soon as he took his first, big bite of it, it was far
better than a breakfast he could have had through the good will of the
policemen from the dirty café.  He felt well and confident, he had
failed to go into work at the bank this morning but that could easily be
excused because of the relatively high position he held there.  Should
he really send in his explanation?   He wondered about it.  If nobody
believed him, and in this case that would be understandable, he could
bring Mrs. Grubach in as a witness, or even the old pair from across the
street, who probably even now were on their way over to the window
opposite.  It puzzled K., at least it puzzled him looking at it from the
policemen's point of view, that they had made him go into the room and
left him alone there, where he had ten different ways of killing
himself.  At the same time, though, he asked himself, this time looking
at it from his own point of view, what reason he could have to do so.
Because those two were sitting there in the next room and had taken his
breakfast, perhaps?  It would have been so pointless to kill himself
that, even if he had wanted to, the pointlessness would have made him
unable.  Maybe, if the policemen had not been so obviously limited in
their mental abilities, it could have been supposed that they had come
to the same conclusion and saw no danger in leaving him alone because of
it.  They could watch now, if they wanted, and see how he went over to
the cupboard in the wall where he kept a bottle of good schnapps, how he
first emptied a glass of it in place of his breakfast and how he then
took a second glassful in order to give himself courage, the last one
just as a precaution for the unlikely chance it would be needed.

        Then he was so startled by a shout to him from the other room that
he struck his teeth against the glass.  "The supervisor wants to see
you!" a voice said.  It was only the shout that startled him, this curt,
abrupt, military shout, that he would not have expected from the
policeman called Franz.  In itself, he found the order very welcome.
"At last!" he called back, locked the cupboard and, without delay,
hurried into the next room.  The two policemen were standing there and
chased him back into his bedroom as if that were a matter of course.
"What d'you think you're doing?" they cried.  "Think you're going to see
the supervisor dressed in just your shirt, do you?  He'd see to it you
got a right thumping, and us and all!"  "Let go of me for God's sake!"
called K., who had already been pushed back as far as his wardrobe, "if
you accost me when I'm still in bed you can't expect to find me in my
evening dress."  "That won't help you," said the policemen, who always
became very quiet, almost sad, when K. began to shout, and in that way
confused him or, to some extent, brought him to his senses.  "Ridiculous
formalities!" he grumbled, as he lifted his coat from the chair and kept
it in both his hands for a little while, as if holding it out for the
policemen's inspection.  They shook their heads.  "It's got to be a
black coat,"  they said.  At that, K. threw the coat to the floor and
said - without knowing even himself what he meant by it - "Well it's not
going to be the main trial, after all."  The policemen laughed, but
continued to insist, "It's got to be a black coat."  "Well that's
alright by me if it makes things go any faster," said K.  He opened the
wardrobe himself, spent a long time searching through all the clothes,
and chose his best black suit which had a short jacket that had greatly
surprised those who knew him, then he also pulled out a fresh shirt and
began, carefully, to get dressed.  He secretly told himself that he had
succeeded in speeding things up by letting the policemen forget to make
him have a bath.  He watched them to see if they might remember after
all, but of course it never occurred to them, although Willem did not
forget to send Franz up to the supervisor with the message saying that
K. was getting dressed.

        Once he was properly dressed, K. had to pass by Willem as he went
through the next room into the one beyond, the door of which was already
wide open.  K. knew very well that this room had recently been let to a
typist called 'Miss Bürstner'.  She was in the habit of going out to
work very early and coming back home very late, and K. had never
exchanged more than a few words of greeting with her.  Now, her bedside
table had been pulled into the middle of the room to be used as a desk
for these proceedings, and the supervisor sat behind it.  He had his
legs crossed, and had thrown one arm over the backrest of the chair.

        In one corner of the room there were three young people looking at
the photographs belonging to Miss Bürstner that had been put into a
piece of fabric on the wall.  Hung up on the handle of the open window
was a white blouse.  At the window across the street, there was the old
pair again, although now their number had increased, as behind them, and
far taller than they were, stood a man with an open shirt that showed
his chest and a reddish goatee beard which he squeezed and twisted with
his fingers.  "Josef K.?" asked the supervisor, perhaps merely to
attract K.'s attention as he looked round the room.  K. nodded.  "I
daresay you were quite surprised by all that's been taking place this
morning," said the supervisor as, with both hands, he pushed away the
few items on the bedside table - the candle and box of matches, a book
and a pin cushion which lay there as if they were things he would need
for his own business.  "Certainly," said K., and he began to feel
relaxed now that, at last, he stood in front of someone with some sense,
someone with whom he would be able to talk about his situation.
"Certainly I'm surprised, but I'm not in any way very surprised."
"You're not very surprised?" asked the supervisor, as he positioned the
candle in the middle of the table and the other things in a group around
it.  "Perhaps you don't quite understand me," K. hurriedly pointed out.
"What I mean is ..." here K. broke off what he was saying and looked
round for somewhere to sit.  "I may sit down, mayn't I?" he asked.
"That's not usual," the supervisor answered.  "What I mean is...," said
K. without delaying a second time, "that, yes, I am very surprised but
when you've been in the world for thirty years already and had to make
your own way through everything yourself, which has been my lot, then
you become hardened to surprises and don't take them too hard.
Especially not what's happened today."  "Why especially not what's
happened today?"  "I wouldn't want to say that I see all of this as a
joke, you seem to have gone to too much trouble making all these
arrangements for that.  Everyone in the house must be taking part in it
as well as all of you, that would be going beyond what could be a joke.
So I don't want to say that this is a joke."  "Quite right," said the
supervisor, looking to see how many matches were left in the box.  "But
on the other hand," K. went on, looking round at everyone there and even
wishing he could get the attention of the three who were looking at the
photographs,  "on the other hand this really can't be all that
important.  That follows from the fact that I've been indicted, but
can't think of the slightest  offence for which I could be indicted.
But even that is all beside the point, the main question is: Who is
issuing the indictment?  What office is conducting this affair?  Are you
officials?  None of you is wearing a uniform, unless what you are
wearing" - here he turned towards Franz - "is meant to be a uniform,
it's actually more of a travelling suit.  I require a clear answer to
all these questions, and I'm quite sure that once things have been made
clear we can take our leave of each other on the best of terms."   The
supervisor slammed the box of matches down on the table.  "You're making
a big mistake," he said. "These gentlemen and I have got nothing to do
with your business, in fact we know almost nothing about you.  We could
be wearing uniforms as proper and exact as you like and your situation
wouldn't be any the worse for it.  As to whether you're on a charge, I
can't give you any sort of clear answer to that, I don't even know
whether you are or not.  You're under arrest, you're quite right about
that, but I don't know any more than that.  Maybe these officers have
been chit-chatting with you, well if they have that's all it is, chit-
chat.  I can't give you an answer to your questions, but I can give you
a bit of advice: You'd better think less about us and what's going to
happen to you, and think a bit more about yourself.  And stop making all
this fuss about your sense of innocence; you don't make such a bad
impression, but with all this fuss you're damaging it.  And you ought to
do a bit less talking, too.  Almost everything you've said so far has
been things we could have taken from your behaviour, even if you'd said
no more than a few words.  And what you have said has not exactly been
in your favour."

        K. stared at the supervisor.  Was this man, probably younger than
he was, lecturing him like a schoolmaster?  Was he being punished for
his honesty with a telling off?  And was he to learn nothing about the
reasons for his arrest or those who were arresting him?  He became
somewhat cross and began to walk up and down.  No-one stopped him doing
this and he pushed his sleeves back, felt his chest, straightened his
hair,  went over to the three men, said, "It makes no sense," at which
these three turned round to face him and came towards him with serious
expressions.  He finally came again to a halt in front of the
supervisor's desk.  "State Attorney Hasterer is a good friend of mine,"
he said, "can I telephone him?"  "Certainly," said the supervisor, "but
I don't know what the point of that will be, I suppose you must have
some private matter you want to discuss with him."  "What the point is?"
shouted K., more disconcerted that cross.   "Who do you think you are?
You want to see some point in it while you're carrying out something as
pointless as it could be?  It's enough to make you cry!  These gentlemen
first accost me, and now they sit or stand about in here and let me be
hauled up in front of you.  What point there would be, in telephoning a
state attorney when I'm ostensibly under arrest?  Very well, I won't
make the telephone call."  "You can call him if you want to," said the
supervisor, stretching his hand out towards the outer room where the
telephone was, "please, go on, do make your phone call."  "No, I don't
want to any more," said K., and went over to the window.  Across the
street, the people were still there at the window, and it was only now
that K. had gone up to his window that they seemed to become uneasy
about quietly watching what was going on.  The old couple wanted to get
up but the man behind them calmed them down.  "We've got some kind of
audience over there," called K. to the supervisor, quite loudly, as he
pointed out with his forefinger.  "Go away," he then called across to
them.  And the three of them did immediately retreat a few steps, the
old pair even found themselves behind the man who then concealed them
with the breadth of his body and seemed, going by the movements of his
mouth, to be saying something incomprehensible into the distance.  They
did not disappear entirely, though, but seemed to be waiting for the
moment when they could come back to the window without being noticed.
"Intrusive, thoughtless people!" said K. as he turned back into the
room.  The supervisor may have agreed with him, at least K. thought that
was what he saw from the corner of his eye.  But it was just as possible
that he had not even been listening as he had his hand pressed firmly
down on the table and seemed to be comparing the length of his fingers.
The two policemen were sitting on a chest covered with a coloured
blanket, rubbing their knees.  The three young people had put their
hands on their hips and were looking round aimlessly.  Everything was
still, like in some office that has been forgotten about.  "Now,
gentlemen," called out K., and for a moment it seemed as if he was
carrying all of them on his shoulders, "it looks like your business with
me is over with.  In my opinion, it's best now to stop wondering about
whether you're proceeding correctly or incorrectly, and to bring the
matter to a peaceful close with a mutual handshake.  If you are of the
same opinion, then please..." and he walked up to the supervisor's desk
and held out his hand to him.  The supervisor raised his eyes, bit his
lip and looked at K.'s outstretched hand; K still believed the
supervisor would do as he suggested.  But instead, he stood up, picked
up a hard round hat that was laying on Miss Bürstner's bed and put it
carefully onto his head, using both hands as if trying on a new hat.
"Everything seems so simple to you, doesn't it," he said to K. as he did
so, "so you think we should bring the matter to a peaceful close, do
you.  No, no, that won't do.  Mind you, on the other hand I certainly
wouldn't want you to think there's no hope for you.  No, why should you
think that?  You're simply under arrest, nothing more than that.  That's
what I had to tell you, that's what I've done and now I've seen how
you've taken it.  That's enough for one day and we can take our leave of
each other, for the time being at least.  I expect you'll want to go in
to the bank now, won't you."  "In to the bank?" asked K., "I thought I
was under arrest."   K. said this with a certain amount of defiance as,
although his handshake had not been accepted, he was feeling more
independent of all these people, especially since the supervisor had
stood up.  He was playing with them.  If they left, he had decided he
would run after them and offer to let them arrest him.  That's why he
even repeated, "How can I go in to the bank when I'm under arrest?"  "I
see you've misunderstood me," said the supervisor who was already at the
door. "It's true that you're under arrest, but that shouldn't stop you
from carrying out your job.  And there shouldn't be anything to stop you
carrying on with your usual life."  "In that case it's not too bad,
being under arrest," said K., and went up close to the supervisor.  "I
never meant it should be anything else," he replied.  "It hardly seems
to have been necessary to notify me of the arrest in that case," said K.,
and went even closer.  The others had also come closer. All of them had
gathered together into a narrow space by the door.  "That was my duty,"
said the supervisor.  "A silly duty," said K., unyielding.  "Maybe so,"
replied the supervisor, "only don't let's waste our time talking on like
this.  I had assumed you'd be wanting to go to the bank.  As you're
paying close attention to every word I'll add this: I'm not forcing you
to go to the bank, I'd just assumed you wanted to.  And to make things
easier for you, and to let you get to the bank with as little fuss as
possible I've put these three gentlemen, colleagues of yours, at your
disposal."  "What's that?" exclaimed K., and looked at the three in
astonishment.  He could only remember seeing them in their group by the
photographs, but these characterless, anaemic young people were indeed
officials from his bank, not colleagues of his, that was putting it too
high and it showed a gap in the omniscience of the supervisor, but they
were nonetheless junior members of staff at the bank.  How could K. have
failed to see that?  How occupied he must have been with the supervisor
and the policemen not to have recognised these three!  Rabensteiner,
with his stiff demeanour and swinging hands, Kullich, with his blonde
hair and deep-set eyes, and Kaminer, with his involuntary grin caused by
chronic muscle spasms.  "Good morning," said K. after a while, extending
his hand to the gentlemen as they bowed correctly to him.  "I didn't
recognise you at all.  So, we'll go into work now, shall we?"  The
gentlemen laughed and nodded enthusiastically, as if that was what they
had been waiting for all the time, except that K. had left his hat in
his room so they all dashed, one after another, into the room to fetch
it, which caused a certain amount of embarrassment.  K. stood where he
was and watched them through the open double doorway, the last to go, of
course, was the apathetic Rabensteiner who had broken into no more than
an elegant trot.  Kaminer got to the hat and K., as he often had to do
at the bank, forcibly reminded himself that the grin was not deliberate,
that he in fact wasn't able to grin deliberately.  At that moment Mrs.
Grubach opened the door from the hallway into the living room where all
the people were.  She did not seem to feel guilty about anything at all,
and K., as often before, looked down at the belt of her apron which, for
no reason, cut so deeply into her hefty body.  Once downstairs, K., with
his watch in his hand, decided to take a taxi - he had already been
delayed by half an hour and there was no need to make the delay any
longer.  Kaminer ran to the corner to summon it, and the two others were
making obvious efforts to keep K. diverted when Kullich pointed to the
doorway of the house on the other side of the street where the large man
with the blonde goatee beard appeared and, a little embarrassed at first
at letting himself be seen in his full height, stepped back to the wall
and leant against it.  The old couple were probably still on the stairs.
K. was cross with Kullich for pointing out this man whom he had already
seen himself, in fact whom he had been expecting. "Don't look at him!"
he snapped, without noticing how odd it was to speak to free men in this
way.  But there was no explanation needed anyway as just then the taxi
arrived, they sat inside and set off.  Inside the taxi, K. remembered
that he had not noticed the supervisor and the policemen leaving - the
supervisor had stopped him noticing the three bank staff and now the
three bank staff had stopped him noticing the supervisor.  This showed
that K. was not very attentive, and he resolved to watch himself more
carefully in this respect.  Nonetheless, he gave it no thought as he
twisted himself round and leant over onto the rear shelf of the car to
catch sight of the supervisor and the policemen if he could.  But he
turned back round straight away and leant comfortably into the corner of
the taxi without even having made the effort to see anyone.  Although it
did not seem like it, now was just the time when he needed some
encouragement, but the gentlemen seemed tired just then, Rabensteiner
looked out of the car to the right, Kullich to the left and only Kaminer
was there with his grin at K.'s service.  It would have been inhumane to
make fun of that.

        That spring, whenever possible, K. usually spent his evenings
after work - he usually stayed in the office until nine o'clock - with a
short walk, either by himself or in the company of some of the bank
officials, and then he would go into a pub where he would sit at the
regulars' table with mostly older men until eleven.  There were,
however, also exceptions to this habit, times, for instance, when K. was
invited by the bank's manager (whom he greatly respected for his
industry and trustworthiness) to go with him for a ride in his car or to
eat dinner with him at his large house.  K. would also go, once a week,
to see a girl called Elsa who worked as a waitress in a wine bar through
the night until late in the morning.  During the daytime she only
received visitors while still in bed.

        That evening, though, - the day had passed quickly with a lot of
hard work and many respectful and friendly birthday greetings - K.
wanted to go straight home.  Each time he had any small break from the
day's work he considered, without knowing exactly what he had in mind,
that Mrs. Grubach's flat seemed to have been put into great disarray by
the events of that morning, and that it was up to him to put it back
into order.  Once order had been restored, every trace of those events
would have been erased and everything would take its previous course
once more.  In particular, there was nothing to fear from the three bank
officials, they had immersed themselves back into their paperwork and
there was no alteration to be seen in them.  K. had called each of them,
separately or all together, into his office that day for no other reason
than to observe them; he was always satisfied and had always been able
to let them go again.

        At half past nine that evening, when he arrived back in front of
the building where he lived, he met a young lad in the doorway who was
standing there, his legs apart and smoking a pipe.  "Who are you?"
immediately asked K., bringing his face close to the lad's, as it was
hard to see in the half light of the landing.  "I'm the landlord's son,
sir," answered the lad, taking the pipe from his mouth and stepping to
one side.  "The landlord's son?" asked K., and impatiently knocked on
the ground with his stick.  "Did you want anything, sir?  Would you like
me to fetch my father?"  "No, no," said K., there was something
forgiving in his voice, as if the boy had harmed him in some way and he
was excusing him.  "It's alright," he said then, and went on, but before
going up the stairs he turned round once more.

        He could have gone directly to his room, but as he wanted to speak
with Mrs. Grubach he went straight to her door and knocked.  She was sat
at the table with a knitted stocking and a pile of old stockings in
front of her.  K. apologised, a little embarrassed at coming so late,
but Mrs. Grubach was very friendly and did not want to hear any apology,
she was always ready to speak to him, he knew very well that he was her
best and her favourite tenant.  K. looked round the room, it looked
exactly as it usually did, the breakfast dishes, which had been on the
table by the window that morning, had already been cleared away.  "A
woman's hands will do many things when no-one's looking," he thought, he
might himself have smashed all the dishes on the spot but certainly
would not have been able to carry it all out.  He looked at Mrs. Grubach
with some gratitude.  "Why are you working so late?" he asked.  They
were now both sitting at the table, and K. now and then sank his hands
into the pile of stockings.  "There's a lot of work to do," she said,
"during the day I belong to the tenants; if I'm to sort out my own
things there are only the evenings left to me."  "I fear I may have
caused you some exceptional work today."  "How do you mean, Mr. K.?" she
asked, becoming more interested and leaving her work in her lap.  "I
mean the men who were here this morning."  "Oh, I see," she said, and
went peacefully back to what she was doing, "that was no trouble, not
especially."  K. looked on in silence as she took up the knitted
stocking once more.  She seems surprised at my mentioning it, he
thought, she seems to think it's improper for me to mention it.  All the
more important for me to do so.  An old woman is the only person I can
speak about it with.  "But it must have caused some work for you," he
said then, "but it won't happen again." "No, it can't happen again," she
agreed, and smiled at K. in a way that was almost pained.  "Do you mean
that seriously?" asked K.  "Yes," she said, more gently, "but the
important thing is you mustn't take it too hard.  There are so many
awful things happening in the world!  As you're being so honest with me,
Mr. K., I can admit to you that I listened to a little of what was going
on from behind the door, and that those two policemen told me one or two
things as well.  It's all to do with your happiness, and that's
something that's quite close to my heart, perhaps more than it should be
as I am, after all, only your landlady. Anyway, so I heard one or two
things but I can't really say that it's about anything very serious.
No.  You have been arrested, but it's not in the same way as when they
arrest a thief.  If you're arrested in the same way as a thief, then
it's bad, but an arrest like this ... .  It seems to me that it's
something very complicated - forgive me if I'm saying something stupid -
something very complicated that I don't understand, but something that
you don't really need to understand anyway."

        "There's nothing stupid about what you've said, Mrs. Grubach, or
at least I partly agree with you, only, the way I judge the whole thing
is harsher than yours, and think it's not only not something complicated
but simply a fuss about nothing.  I was just caught unawares, that's
what happened.  If I had got up as soon as I was awake without letting
myself get confused because Anna wasn't there, if I'd got up and paid no
regard to anyone who might have been in my way and come straight to you,
if I'd done something like having my breakfast in the kitchen as an
exception, asked you to bring my clothes from my room, in short, if I
had behaved sensibly then nothing more would have happened, everything
that was waiting to happen would have been stifled.  People are so often
unprepared.  In the bank, for example, I am well prepared, nothing of
this sort could possibly happen to me there, I have my own assistant
there, there are telephones for internal and external calls in front of
me on the desk, I continually receive visits from people,
representatives, officials, but besides that, and most importantly, I'm
always occupied with my work, that's to say I'm always alert, it would
even be a pleasure for me to find myself faced with something of that
sort.  But now it's over with, and I didn't really even want to talk
about it any more, only I wanted to hear what you, as a sensible woman,
thought about it all, and I'm very glad to hear that we're in agreement.
But now you must give me your hand, an agreement of this sort needs to
be confirmed with a handshake."

        Will she shake hands with me?  The supervisor didn't shake hands,
he thought, and looked at the woman differently from before, examining
her.  She stood up, as he had also stood up, and was a little self-
conscious, she hadn't been able to understand everything that K.
said.  As a result of this self consciousness she said something that
she certainly did not intend and certainly was not appropriate.  "Don't
take it so hard, Mr. K.," she said, with tears in her voice and also, of
course, forgetting the handshake.  "I didn't know I was taking it hard,"
said K., feeling suddenly tired and seeing that if this woman did agree
with him it was of very little value.

        Before going out the door he asked, "Is Miss Bürstner home?"
"No," said Mrs. Grubach, smiling as she gave this simple piece of
information, saying something sensible at last.  "She's at the theatre.
Did you want to see her?  Should I give her a message?"  "I, er, I just
wanted to have a few words with her."  "I'm afraid I don't know when
she's coming in; she usually gets back late when she's been to the
theatre."  "It really doesn't matter," said K. his head hanging as he
turned to the door to leave, "I just wanted to give her my apology for
taking over her room today."  "There's no need for that, Mr. K., you're
too conscientious, the young lady doesn't know anything about it, she
hasn't been home since early this morning and everything's been tidied
up again, you can see for yourself."  And she opened the door to Miss
Bürstner's room.  "Thank you, I'll take your word for it," said K, but
went nonetheless over to the open door.  The moon shone quietly into the
unlit room.  As far as could be seen, everything was indeed in its
place, not even the blouse was hanging on the window handle.  The
pillows on the bed looked remarkably plump as they lay half in the
moonlight.  "Miss Bürstner often comes home late," said K., looking at
Mrs. Grubach as if that were her responsibility.  "That's how young
people are!" said Mrs. Grubach to excuse herself.  "Of course, of
course," said K., "but it can be taken too far."  "Yes, it can be," said
Mrs. Grubach, "you're so right, Mr. K.  Perhaps it is in this case.  I
certainly wouldn't want to say anything nasty about Miss Bürstner, she
is a good, sweet girl, friendly, tidy, punctual, works hard, I
appreciate all that very much, but one thing is true, she ought to have
more pride, be a bit less forthcoming.  Twice this month already, in the
street over the way, I've seen her with a different gentleman.  I really
don't like saying this, you're the only one I've said this to, Mr. K., I
swear to God, but I'm going to have no choice but to have a few words
with Miss Bürstner about it myself.  And it's not the only thing about
her that I'm worried about."  "Mrs. Grubach, you are on quite the wrong
track," said K., so angry that he was hardly able to hide it, "and you
have moreover misunderstood what I was saying about Miss Bürstner, that
is not what I meant.  In fact I warn you quite directly not to say
anything to her, you are quite mistaken, I know Miss Bürstner very well
and there is no truth at all in what you say.  And what's more, perhaps
I'm going to far, I don't want to get in your way, say to her whatever
you see fit.  Good night."  "Mr. K.," said Mrs. Grubach as if asking him
for something and hurrying to his door which he had already opened, "I
don't want to speak to Miss Bürstner at all, not yet, of course I'll
continue to keep an eye on her but you're the only one I've told what I
know.  And it is, after all something that everyone who lets rooms has
to do if she's to keep the house decent, that's all I'm trying to do."
"Decent!" called out K. through the crack in the door, "if you want to
keep the house decent you'll first have to give me notice."  Then he
slammed the door shut, there was a gentle knocking to which he paid no
more attention.

        He did not feel at all like going to bed, so he decided to stay
up, and this would also give him the chance to find out when Miss
Bürstner would arrive home.  Perhaps it would also still be possible,
even if a little inappropriate, to have a few words with her.  As he lay
there by the window, pressing his hands to his tired eyes, he even
thought for a moment that he might punish Mrs. Grubach by persuading
Miss Bürstner to give in her notice at the same time as he would.  But
he immediately realised that that would be shockingly excessive, and
there would even be the suspicion that he was moving house because of
the incidents of that morning.  Nothing would have been more nonsensical
and, above all, more pointless and contemptible.

        When he had become tired of looking out onto the empty street he
slightly opened the door to the living room so that he could see anyone
who entered the flat from where he was and lay down on the couch.  He
lay there, quietly smoking a cigar, until about eleven o'clock.  He
wasn't able to hold out longer than that, and went a little way into the
hallway as if in that way he could make Miss Bürstner arrive sooner.  He
had no particular desire for her, he could not even remember what she
looked like, but now he wanted to speak to her and it irritated him that
her late arrival home meant this day would be full of unease and
disorder right to its very end.  It was also her fault that he had not
had any dinner that evening and that he had been unable to visit Elsa as
he had intended.  He could still make up for both of those things,
though, if he went to the wine bar where Elsa worked.  He wanted to do
so even later, after the discussion with Miss Bürstner.

        It was already gone half past eleven when someone could be heard
in the stairway.  K., who had been lost in his thoughts in the hallway,
walking up and down loudly as if it were his own room, fled behind his
door.  Miss Bürstner had arrived.  Shivering, she pulled a silk shawl
over her slender shoulders as she locked the door.  The next moment she
would certainly go into her room, where K. ought not to intrude in the
middle of the night; that meant he would have to speak to her now, but,
unfortunately, he had not put the electric light on in his room so that
when he stepped out of the dark it would give the impression of being an
attack and would certainly, at the very least, have been quite alarming.
There was no time to lose, and in his helplessness he whispered through
the crack of the door, "Miss Bürstner."  It sounded like he was pleading
with her, not calling to her.  "Is there someone there?" asked Miss
Bürstner, looking round with her eyes wide open.  "It's me," said K. and
came out.  "Oh, Mr. K.!" said Miss Bürstner with a smile. "Good
Evening," and offered him her hand.  "I wanted to have a word with you,
if you would allow me?"  "Now?" asked Miss Bürstner, "does it have to be
now? It is a little odd, isn't it?"  "I've been waiting for you since
nine o'clock."  "Well, I was at the theatre, I didn't know anything
about you waiting for me."  "The reason I need to speak to you only came
up today"  "I see, well I don't see why not, I suppose, apart from being
so tired I could drop.  Come into my room for a few minutes then.  We
certainly can't talk out here, we'd wake everyone up and I think that
would be more unpleasant for us than for them.  Wait here till I've put
the light on in my room, and then turn the light down out here."  K. did
as he was told, and then even waited until Miss Bürstner came out of her
room and quietly invited him, once more, to come in.  "Sit down," she
said, indicating the ottoman, while she herself remained standing by the
bedpost despite the tiredness she had spoken of; she did not even take
off her hat, which was small but decorated with an abundance of flowers.
"What is it you wanted, then?  I'm really quite curious."  She gently
crossed her legs.
"I expect you'll say," K. began, "that the matter really isn't all that
urgent and we don't need to talk about it right now, but ..."  "I never
listen to introductions," said Miss Bürstner.  "That makes my job so
much easier," said K.  "This morning, to some extent through my fault,
your room was made a little untidy, this happened because of people I
did not know and against my will but, as I said, because of my fault; I
wanted to apologise for it."  "My room?" asked Miss Bürstner, and
instead of looking round the room scrutinised K.  "It is true," said K.,
and now, for the first time, they looked each other in the eyes,
"there's no point in saying exactly how this came about."  "But that's
the interesting thing about it," said Miss Bürstner.  "No," said K.
"Well then," said Miss Bürstner, "I don't want to force my way into any
secrets, if you insist that it's of no interest I won't insist.  I'm
quite happy to forgive you for it, as you ask, especially as I can't see
anything at all that's been left untidy."  With her hand laid flat on
her lower hip, she made a tour around the room.  At the mat where the
photographs were she stopped.  "Look at this!" she cried.  "My
photographs really have been put in the wrong places.  Oh, that's
horrible.  Someone really has been in my room without permission."  K.
nodded, and quietly cursed Kaminer who worked at his bank and who was
always active doing things that had neither use nor purpose.  "It is
odd," said Miss Bürstner, "that I'm forced to forbid you to do something
that you ought to have forbidden yourself to do, namely to come into my
room when I'm not here."  "But I did explain to you," said K., and went
over to join her by the photographs, "that it wasn't me who interfered
with your photographs; but as you don't believe me I'll have to admit
that the investigating committee brought along three bank employees with
them, one of them must have touched your photographs and as soon as I
get the chance I'll ask to have him dismissed from the bank.  Yes, there
was an investigating committee here," added K., as the young lady was
looking at him enquiringly.  "Because of you?" she asked.  "Yes,"
answered K.  "No!" the lady cried with a laugh.  "Yes, they were," said
K., "you believe that I'm innocent then, do you?"  "Well now, innocent
..." said the lady, "I don't want to start making any pronouncements
that might have serious consequences, I don't really know you after all,
it means they're dealing with a serious criminal if they send an
investigating committee straight out to get him.  But you're not in
custody now - at least I take it you've not escaped from prison
considering that you seem quite calm - so you can't have committed any
crime of that sort."  "Yes," said K., "but it might be that the
investigating committee could see that I'm innocent, or not so guilty as
had been supposed."  "Yes, that's certainly a possibility," said Miss
Bürstner, who seemed very interested.  "Listen," said K., "you don't
have much experience in legal matters."  "No, that's true, I don't,"
said Miss Bürstner, "and I've often regretted it, as I'd like to know
everything and I'm very interested in legal matters.  There's something
peculiarly attractive about the law, isn't there?  But I'll certainly be
perfecting my knowledge in this area, as next month I start work in a
legal office."  "That's very good," said K., "that means you'll be able
to give me some help with my trial."  "That could well be," said Miss
Bürstner, "why not?  I like to make use of what I know."  "I mean it
quite seriously," said K., "or at least, half seriously, as you do.
This affair is too petty to call in a lawyer, but I could make good use
of someone who could give me advice."  "Yes, but if I'm to give you
advice I'll have to know what it's all about," said Miss Bürstner.
"That's exactly the problem," said K., "I don't know that myself."  "So
you have been making fun of me, then," said Miss Bürstner exceedingly
disappointed, "you really ought not to try something like that on at
this time of night."  And she stepped away from the photographs where
they had stood so long together.  "Miss Bürstner, no," said K., "I'm not
making fun of you.  Please believe me!  I've already told you everything
I know.  More than I know, in fact, as it actually wasn't even an
investigating committee, that's just what I called them because I don't
know what else to call them.  There was no cross questioning at all, I
was merely arrested, but by a committee."  Miss Bürstner sat on the
ottoman and laughed again.  "What was it like then?" she asked.  "It was
terrible" said K., although his mind was no longer on the subject, he
had become totally absorbed by Miss Bürstner's gaze who was supporting
her chin on one hand - the elbow rested on the cushion of the ottoman -
and slowly stroking her hip with the other.  "That's too vague," said
Miss Bürstner.  "What's too vague?" asked K.  Then he remembered himself
and asked, "Would you like me to show you what it was like?"  He wanted
to move in some way but did not want to leave.  "I'm already tired,"
said Miss Bürstner.  "You arrived back so late," said K.  "Now you've
started telling me off.  Well I suppose I deserve it as I shouldn't have
let you in here in the first place, and it turns out there wasn't even
any point."  "Oh, there was a point, you'll see now how important a
point it was," said K.  "May I move this table away from your bedside
and put it here?"  "What do you think you're doing?" said Miss Bürstner.
"Of course you can't!"  "In that case I can't show you," said K., quite
upset, as if Miss Bürstner had committed some incomprehensible offence
against him.  "Alright then, if you need it to show what you mean, just
take the bedside table then," said Miss Bürstner, and after a short
pause added in a weak voice,  "I'm so tired I'm allowing more than I
ought to."  K. put the little table in the middle of the room and sat
down behind it.  "You have to get a proper idea of where the people were
situated, it is very interesting.  I'm the supervisor, sitting over
there on the chest are two policemen, standing next to the photographs
there are three young people.  Hanging on the handle of the window is a
white blouse - I just mention that by the way.  And now it begins.  Ah
yes, I'm forgetting myself, the most important person of all, so I'm
standing here in front of the table.  The supervisor is sitting
extremely comfortably with his legs crossed and his arm hanging over the
backrest here like some layabout.  And now it really does begin.  The
supervisor calls out as if he had to wake me up, in fact he shouts at
me, I'm afraid, if I'm to make it clear to you, I'll have to shout as
well, and it's nothing more than my name that he shouts out."  Miss
Bürstner, laughing as she listened to him, laid her forefinger on her
mouth so that K. would not shout, but it was too late.  K. was too
engrossed in his role and slowly called out, "Josef K.!".  It was not as
loud as he had threatened, but nonetheless, once he had suddenly called
it out, the cry seemed gradually to spread itself all round the room.

        There was a series of loud, curt and regular knocks at the door of
the adjoining room.  Miss Bürstner went pale and laid her hand on her
heart.  K. was especially startled, as for a moment he had been quite
unable to think of anything other than the events of that morning and
the girl for whom he was performing them.  He had hardly pulled himself
together when he jumped over to Miss Bürstner and took her hand.  "Don't
be afraid," he whispered, "I'll put everything right.  But who can it
be?  It's only the living room next door, nobody sleeps in there."  "Yes
they do," whispered Miss Bürstner into K.'s ear, "a nephew of Mrs.
Grubach's, an captain in the army, has been sleeping there since
yesterday.  There's no other room free.  I'd forgotten about it too.
Why did you have to shout like that?  You've made me quite upset."
"There is no reason for it," said K., and, now as she sank back onto the
cushion, kissed her forehead.  "Go away, go away," she said, hurriedly
sitting back up, "get out of here, go, what is it you want, he's
listening at the door he can hear everything.  You're causing me so much
trouble!"  "I won't go," said K., "until you've calmed down a bit.  Come
over into the other corner of the room, he won't be able to hear us
there."  She let him lead her there. "Don't forget," he said, "although
this might be unpleasant for you you're not in any real danger.  You
know how much esteem Mrs. Grubach has for  me, she's the one who will
make all the decisions in this, especially as the captain is her nephew,
but she believes everything I say without question.  What's more, she
has borrowed a large sum of money from me and that makes her dependent
on me.  I will confirm whatever you say to explain our being here
together, however inappropriate it might be, and I guarantee to make
sure that Mrs. Grubach will not only say she believes the explanation in
public but will believe it truly and sincerely.  You will have no need
to consider me in any way.  If you wish to let it be known that I have
attacked you then Mrs. Grubach will be informed of such and she will
believe it without even losing her trust in me, that's how much respect
she has for me."  Miss Bürstner looked at the floor in front of her,
quiet and a little sunk in on herself.  "Why would Mrs. Grubach not
believe that I've attacked you?" added K. He looked at her hair in front
of him, parted, bunched down, reddish and firmly held in place.  He
thought she would look up at him, but without changing her manner she
said, "Forgive me, but it was the suddenness of the knocking that
startled me so much, not so much what the consequences of the captain
being here might be.  It was all so quiet after you'd shouted, and then
there was the knocking, that's was made me so shocked, and I was sitting
right by the door, the knocking was right next to me.  Thank you for
your suggestions, but I won't accept them.  I can bear the
responsibility for anything that happens in my room myself, and I can do
so with anyone.  I'm surprised you don't realise just how insulting your
suggestions are and what they imply about me, although I certainly
acknowledge your good intentions.  But now, please go, leave me alone, I
need you to go now even more than I did earlier.  The couple of minutes
you asked for have grown into half an hour, more than half an hour now."
K. took hold of her hand, and then of her wrist, "You're not cross with
me, though?" he said.  She pulled her hand away and answered, "No, no,
I'm never cross with anyone."  He grasped her wrist once more, she
tolerated it now and, in that way, lead him to the door.  He had fully
intended to leave.  But when he reached the door he came to a halt as if
he hadn't expected to find a door there, Miss Bürstner made use of that
moment to get herself free, open the door, slip out into the hallway and
gently say to K. from there, "Now, come along, please.  Look," she
pointed to the captain's door, from under which there was a light
shining, "he's put a light on and he's laughing at us."  "Alright, I'm
coming," said K., moved forward, took hold of her, kissed her on the
mouth and then over her whole face like a thirsty animal lapping with
its tongue when it eventually finds water.  He finally kissed her on her
neck and her throat and left his lips pressed there for a long time.  He
did not look up until there was a noise from the captain's room.  "I'll
go now," he said, he wanted to address Miss Bürstner by her Christian
name, but did not know it.  She gave him a tired nod, offered him her
hand to kiss as she turned away as if she did not know what she was
doing, and went back into her room with her head bowed.  A short while
later, K. was lying in his bed. He very soon went to sleep, but before
he did he thought a little while about his behaviour, he was satisfied
with it but felt some surprise that he was not more satisfied; he was
seriously worried about Miss Bürstner because of the captain.




Chapter Two
First Cross-examination

        K. was informed by telephone that there would be a small hearing
concerning his case the following Sunday. He was made aware that these
cross examinations would follow one another regularly, perhaps not every
week but quite frequently. On the one hand it was in everyone's interest
to bring proceedings quickly to their conclusion, but on the other hand
every aspect of the examinations had to be carried out thoroughly
without lasting too long because of the associated stress.  For these
reasons, it had been decided to hold a series of brief examinations
following on one after another.  Sunday had been chosen as the day for
the hearings so that K. would not be disturbed in his professional work.
It was assumed that he would be in agreement with this, but if he wished
for another date then, as far as possible, he would be accommodated.
Cross-examinations could even be held in the night, for instance, but K.
would probably not be fresh enough at that time.  Anyway, as long as K.
made no objection, the hearing would be left on Sundays.  It was a
matter of course that he would have to appear without fail, there was
probably no need to point this out to him.  He would be given the number
of the building where he was to present himself, which was in a street
in a suburb well away from the city centre which K. had never been to
before.

        Once he had received this notice, K. hung up the receiver without
giving an answer; he had decided immediately to go there that Sunday, it
was certainly necessary, proceedings had begun and he had to face up to
it, and this first examination would probably also be the last.  He was
still standing in thought by the telephone when he heard the voice of
the deputy director behind him - he wanted to use the telephone but K.
stood in his way.  "Bad news?" asked the deputy director casually, not
in order to find anything out but just to get K. away from the device.
"No, no," said K., he stepped to one side but did not go away entirely.
The deputy director picked up the receiver and, as he waited for his
connection, turned away from it and said to K.,  "One question, Mr. K.:
Would you like to give me the pleasure of joining me on my sailing boat
on Sunday morning?  There's quite a few people coming, you're bound to
know some of them.  One of them is Hasterer, the state attorney.  Would
you like to come along?  Do come along!"  K. tried to pay attention to
what the deputy director was saying.  It was of no small importance for
him, as this invitation from the deputy director, with whom he had never
got on very well, meant that he was trying to improve his relations with
him.  It showed how important K. had become in the bank and how its
second most important official seemed to value his friendship, or at
least his impartiality.  He was only speaking at the side of the
telephone receiver while he waited for his connection, but in giving
this invitation the deputy director was humbling himself.  But K. would
have to humiliate him a second time as a result, he said, "Thank you
very much, but I'm afraid I will have no time on Sunday, I have a
previous obligation."  "Pity," said the deputy director, and turned to
the telephone conversation that had just been connected.  It was not a
short conversation, but K., remained standing confused by the instrument
all the time it was going on.  It was only when the deputy director hung
up that he was shocked into awareness and said, in order to partially
excuse his standing there for no reason, "I've just received a telephone
call, there's somewhere I need to go, but they forgot to tell me what
time."  "Ask them then," said the deputy director.  "It's not that
important," said K., although in that way his earlier excuse, already
weak enough, was made even weaker.  As he went, the deputy director
continued to speak about other things.  K. forced himself to answer, but
his thoughts were mainly about that Sunday, how it would be best to get
there for nine o'clock in the morning as that was the time that courts
always start work on weekdays.

        The weather was dull on Sunday.  K. was very tired, as he had
stayed out drinking until late in the night celebrating with some of the
regulars, and he had almost overslept.  He dressed hurriedly, without
the time to think and assemble the various plans he had worked out
during the week.  With no breakfast, he rushed to the suburb he had been
told about.  Oddly enough, although he had little time to look around
him, he came across the three bank officials involved in his case,
Rabensteiner, Kullich and Kaminer.  The first two were travelling in a
tram that went across K.'s route, but Kaminer sat on the terrace of a
café and leant curiously over the wall as K. came over.  All of them
seemed to be looking at him, surprised at seeing their superior running;
it was  a kind of pride that made K. want to go on foot, this was his
affair and the idea of any help from strangers, however slight, was
repulsive to him, he also wanted to avoid asking for anyone's help
because that would initiate them into the affair even if only slightly.
And after all, he had no wish at all to humiliate himself before the
committee by being too punctual.  Anyway, now he was running so that he
would get there by nine o'clock if at all possible, even though he had
no appointment for this time.

        He had thought that he would recognise the building from a
distance by some kind of sign, without knowing exactly what the sign
would look like, or from some particular kind of activity outside the
entrance.  K. had been told that the building was in Juliusstrasse, but
when he stood at the street's entrance it consisted on each side of
almost nothing but monotonous, grey constructions, tall blocks of flats
occupied by poor people.  Now, on  a Sunday morning, most of the windows
were occupied, men in their shirtsleeves leant out smoking, or carefully
and gently held small children on the sills.  Other windows were piled
up with bedding, above which the dishevelled head of a woman would
briefly appear.  People called out to each other across the street, one
of the calls provoked a loud laugh about K. himself.  It was a long
street, and spaced evenly along it were small shops below street level,
selling various kinds of foodstuffs, which you reached by going down a
few steps.  Women went in and out of them or stood chatting on the
steps.  A fruitmonger, taking his goods up to the windows, was just as
inattentive as K. and nearly knocked him down with his cart.  Just then,
a gramophone, which in better parts of town would have been seen as worn
out, began to play some murderous tune.

        K. went further into the street, slowly, as if he had plenty of
time now, or as if the examining magistrate were looking at him from one
of the windows and therefore knew that K. had found his way there.  It
was shortly after nine.  The building was quite far down the street, it
covered so much area it was almost extraordinary, and the gateway in
particular was tall and long.  It was clearly intended for delivery
wagons belonging to the various warehouses all round the yard which were
now locked up and carried the names of companies some of which K. knew
from his work at the bank.  In contrast with his usual habits, he
remained standing a while at the entrance to the yard taking in all
these external details.  Near him, there was a bare-footed man sitting
on a crate and reading a newspaper.  There were two lads swinging on a
hand cart.  In front of a pump stood a weak, young girl in a bedjacket
who, as the water flowed into her can, looked at K.  There was a piece
of rope stretched between two windows in a corner of the yard, with some
washing hanging on it to dry.  A man stood below it calling out
instructions to direct the work being done.

        K. went over to the stairway to get to the room where the hearing
was to take place, but then stood still again as besides these steps he
could see three other stairway entrances, and there also seemed to be a
small passageway at the end of the yard leading into a second yard.  It
irritated him that he had not been given more precise directions to the
room, it meant they were either being especially neglectful with him or
especially indifferent, and he decided to make that clear to them very
loudly and very unambiguously.  In the end he decided to climb up the
stairs, his thoughts playing on something that he remembered the
policeman, Willem, saying to him; that the court is attracted by the
guilt, from which it followed that the courtroom must be on the stairway
that K. selected by chance.

        As he went up he disturbed a large group of children playing on
the stairs who looked at him as he stepped through their rows.  "Next
time I come here," he said to himself, "I must either bring sweets with
me to make them like me or a stick to hit them with."  Just before he
reached the first landing he even had to wait a little while until a
ball had finished its movement, two small lads with sly faces like
grown-up scoundrels held him by his trouser-legs until it had; if he
were to shake them off he would have to hurt them, and he was afraid of
what noise they would make by shouting.

        On the first floor, his search began for real.  He still felt
unable to ask for the investigating committee, and so he invented a
joiner called Lanz - that name occurred to him because the captain, Mrs.
Grubach's nephew, was called Lanz - so that he could ask at every flat
whether Lanz the joiner lived there and thus obtain a chance to look
into the rooms.  It turned out, though, that that was mostly possible
without further ado, as almost all the doors were left open and the
children ran in and out.  Most of them were small, one-windowed rooms
where they also did the cooking.  Many women held babies in one arm and
worked at the stove with the other.   Half grown girls, who seemed to be
dressed in just their pinafores worked hardest running to and fro.  In
every room, the beds were still in use by people who were ill, or still
asleep, or people stretched out on them in their clothes.  K. knocked at
the flats where the doors were closed and asked whether Lanz the joiner
lived there.   It was usually a woman who opened the door, heard the
enquiry and turned to somebody in the room who would raise himself from
the bed.  "The gentleman's asking if a joiner called Lanz, lives here."
"A joiner, called Lanz?" he would ask from the bed."  "That's right," K.
would say, although it was clear that the investigating committee was
not to be found there, and so his task was at an end.  There were many
who thought it must be very important for K. to find Lanz the joiner and
thought long about it, naming a joiner who was not called Lanz or giving
a name that had some vague similarity with Lanz, or they asked
neighbours or accompanied K. to a door a long way away where they
thought someone of that sort might live in the back part of the building
or where someone would be who could advise K. better than they could
themselves.  K. eventually had to give up asking if he did not want to
be led all round from floor to floor in this way.  He regretted his
initial plan, which had at first seemed so practical to him.  As he
reached the fifth floor, he decided to give up the search, took his
leave of a friendly, young worker who wanted to lead him on still
further and went down the stairs.  But then the thought of how much time
he was wasting made him cross, he went back again and knocked at the
first door on the fifth floor.  The first thing he saw in the small room
was a large clock on the wall which already showed ten o'clock.  "Is
there a joiner called Lanz who lives here?" he asked.  "Pardon?" said a
young woman with black, shining eyes who was, at that moment, washing
children's underclothes in a bucket.  She pointed her wet hand towards
the open door of the adjoining room.

        K. thought he had stepped into a meeting.  A medium sized, two
windowed room was filled with the most diverse crowd of people - nobody
paid any attention to the person who had just entered.  Close under its
ceiling it was surrounded by a gallery which was also fully occupied and
where the people could only stand bent down with their heads and their
backs touching the ceiling.  K., who found the air too stuffy, stepped
out again and said to the young woman, who had probably misunderstood
what he had said, "I asked for a joiner, someone by the name of Lanz."
"Yes," said the woman, "please go on in."  K. would probably not have
followed her if the woman had not gone up to him, taken hold of the door
handle and said, "I'll have to close the door after you, no-one else
will be allowed in."  "Very sensible," said K., "but it's too full
already."  But then he went back in anyway.  He passed through between
two men who were talking beside the door - one of them held both hands
far out in front of himself making the movements of counting out money,
the other looked him closely in the eyes - and someone took him by the
hand.  It was a small, red-faced youth.  "Come in, come in," he said.
K. let himself be led by him, and it turned out that there was -
surprisingly in a densely packed crowd of people moving to and fro - a
narrow passage which may have been the division between two factions;
this idea was reinforced by the fact that in the first few rows to the
left and the right of him there was hardly any face looking in his
direction, he saw nothing but the backs of people directing their speech
and their movements only towards members of their own side.  Most of
them were dressed in black, in old, long, formal frock coats that hung
down loosely around them.  These clothes were the only thing that
puzzled  K., as he would otherwise have taken the whole assembly for a
local political meeting.

        At the other end of the hall where K. had been led there was a
little table set at an angle on a very low podium which was as
overcrowded as everywhere else, and behind the table, near the edge of
the podium, sat a small, fat, wheezing man who was talking with someone
behind him.  This second man was standing with his legs crossed and his
elbows on the backrest of the chair, provoking much laughter.  From time
to time he threw his arm in the air as if doing a caricature of someone.
The youth who was leading K. had some difficulty in reporting to the
man.  He had already tried twice to tell him something, standing on tip-
toe, but without getting the man's attention as he sat there above him.
It was only when one of the people up on the podium drew his attention
to the youth that the man turned to him and leant down to hear what it
was he quietly said.  Then he pulled out his watch and quickly looked
over at K.  "You should have been here one hour and five minutes ago,"
he said.  K. was going to give him a reply but had no time to do so, as
hardly had the man spoken than a general muttering arose all over the
right hand side of the hall.  "You should have been here one hour and
five minutes ago," the man now repeated, raising his voice this time,
and quickly looked round the hall beneath him.  The muttering also
became immediately louder and, as the man said nothing more, died away
only gradually.  Now the hall was much quieter than when K. had entered.
Only the people up in the gallery had not stopped passing remarks.  As
far as could be distinguished, up in the half-darkness, dust and haze,
they seemed to be less well dressed than those below.  Many of them had
brought pillows that they had put between their heads and the ceiling so
that they would not hurt themselves pressed against it.

        K. had decided he would do more watching than talking, so he did
not defend himself for supposedly having come late, and simply said,
"Well maybe I have arrived late, I'm here now."  There followed loud
applause, once more from the right hand side of the hall.  Easy people
to get on your side, thought K., and was bothered only by the quiet from
the left hand side which was directly behind him and from which there
was applause from only a few individuals.  He wondered what he could say
to get all of them to support him together or, if that were not
possible, to at least get the support of the others for a while.

        "Yes," said the man, "but I'm now no longer under any obligation
to hear your case" - there was once more a muttering, but this time it
was misleading as the man waved the people's objections aside with his
hand and continued - "I will, however, as an exception, continue with it
today.  But you should never arrive late like this again.  And now, step
forward!"  Someone jumped down from the podium so that there would be a
place free for K., and K. stepped up onto it.  He stood pressed closely
against the table, the press of the crowd behind him was so great that
he had to press back against it if he did not want to push the judge's
desk down off the podium and perhaps the judge along with it.

        The judge, however, paid no attention to that but sat very
comfortably on his chair and, after saying a few words to close his
discussion with the man behind him, reached for a little note book, the
only item on his desk.  It was like an old school exercise book and had
become quite misshapen from much thumbing.  "Now then," said the judge,
thumbing through the book. He turned to K. with the tone of someone who
knows his facts and said, "you are a house painter?"  "No," said K., "I
am the chief clerk in a large bank."  This reply was followed by
laughter among the right hand faction down in the hall, it was so hearty
that K. couldn't stop himself joining in with it.  The people supported
themselves with their hands on their knees and shook as if suffering a
serious attack of coughing.  Even some of those in the gallery were
laughing.  The judge had become quite cross but seemed to have no power
over those below him in the hall, he tried to reduce what harm had been
done in the gallery and jumped up threatening them, his eyebrows, until
then hardly remarkable, pushed themselves up and became big, black and
bushy over his eyes.

        The left hand side of the hall was still quiet, though, the people
stood there in rows with their faces looking towards the podium
listening to what was being said there, they observed the noise from the
other side of the hall with the same quietness and even allowed some
individuals from their own ranks, here and there, to go forward into the
other faction.  The people in the left faction were not only fewer in
number than the right but probably were no more important than them,
although their behaviour was calmer and that made it seem like they
were.  When K. now began to speak he was convinced he was doing it in
the same way as them.

        "Your question, My Lord, as to whether I am a house painter - in
fact even more than that, you did not ask at all but merely imposed it
on me - is symptomatic of the whole way these proceedings against me are
being carried out.   Perhaps you will object that there are no
proceedings against me.  You will be quite right, as there are
proceedings only if I acknowledge that there are.  But, for the moment,
I do acknowledge it, out of pity for yourselves to a large extent.  It's
impossible not to observe all this business without feeling pity.  I
don't say things are being done without due care but I would like to
make it clear that it is I who make the acknowledgement."

K. stopped speaking and looked down into the hall.  He had spoken
sharply, more sharply than he had intended, but he had been quite right.
It should have been rewarded with some applause here and there but
everything was quiet, they were all clearly waiting for what would
follow, perhaps the quietness was laying the ground for an outbreak of
activity that would bring this whole affair to an end.  It was somewhat
disturbing that just then the door at the end of the hall opened, the
young washerwoman, who seemed to have finished her work, came in and,
despite all her caution, attracted the attention of some of the people
there.  It was only the judge who gave K. any direct pleasure, as he
seemed to have been immediately struck by K.'s words.  Until then, he
had listened to him standing, as K.'s speech had taken him by surprise
while he was directing his attention to the gallery.  Now, in the pause,
he sat down very slowly, as if he did not want anyone to notice.  He
took out the notebook again, probably so that he could give the
impression of being calmer.

        "That won't help you, sir," continued K., "even your little book
will only confirm what I say."  K. was satisfied to hear nothing but his
own quiet words in this room full of strangers, and he even dared
casually to pick up the examining judge's notebook and, touching it only
with the tips of his fingers as if it were something revolting, lifted
it in the air, holding it just by one of the middle pages so that the
others on each side of it, closely written, blotted and yellowing,
flapped down.  "Those are the official notes of the examining judge," he
said, and let the notebook fall down onto the desk.  "You can read in
your book as much as you like, sir, I really don't have anything in this
charge book to be afraid of, even though I don't have access to it as I
wouldn't want it in my hand, I can only touch it with two fingers."  The
judge grabbed the notebook from where it had fallen on the desk - which
could only have been a sign of his deep humiliation, or at least that is
how it must have been perceived - tried to tidy it up a little, and held
it once more in front of himself in order to read from it.

        The people in the front row looked up at him, showing such tension
on their faces that he looked back down at them for some time.  Every
one of them was an old man, some of them with white beards.  Could they
perhaps be the crucial group who could turn the whole assembly one way
or the other?  They had sunk into a state of  motionlessness while K.
gave his oration, and it had not been possible to raise them from this
passivity even when the judge was being humiliated.  "What has happened
to me," continued K., with less of the vigour he had had earlier, he
continually scanned the faces in the first row, and this gave his
address a somewhat nervous and distracted character, "what has happened
to me is not just an isolated case.  If it were it would not be of much
importance as it's not of much importance to me, but it is a symptom of
proceedings which are carried out against many.  It's on behalf of them
that I stand here now, not for myself alone."

        Without having intended it, he had raised his voice.  Somewhere in
the hall, someone raised his hands and applauded him shouting, "Bravo!
Why not then?  Bravo!  Again I say, Bravo!"  Some of the men in the
first row groped around in their beards, none of them looked round to
see who was shouting.  Not even K. thought him of any importance but it
did raise his spirits; he no longer thought it at all necessary that all
of those in the hall should applaud him, it was enough if the majority
of them began  to think about the matter and if only one of them, now
and then, was persuaded.

        "I'm not trying to be a successful orator," said K. after this
thought, "that's probably more than I'm capable of anyway.  I'm sure the
examining judge can speak far better than I can, it is part of his job
after all.  All that I want is a public discussion of a public wrong.
Listen: ten days ago I was placed under arrest, the arrest itself is
something I laugh about but that's beside the point.  They came for me
in the morning when I was still in bed.  Maybe the order had been given
to arrest some house painter - that seems possible after what the judge
has said - someone who is as innocent as I am, but it was me they chose.
There were two police thugs occupying the next room.  They could not
have taken better precautions if I had been a dangerous robber.  And
these policemen were unprincipled riff-raff, they talked at me till I
was sick of it, they wanted bribes, they wanted to trick me into giving
them my clothes, they wanted money, supposedly so that they could bring
me my breakfast after they had blatantly eaten my own breakfast in front
of my eyes.  And even that was not enough.  I was led in front of the
supervisor in another room.  This was the room of a lady who I have a
lot of respect for, and I was forced to look on while the supervisor and
the policemen made quite a mess of this room because of me, although not
through any fault of mine.  It was not easy to stay calm, but I managed
to do so and was completely calm when I asked the supervisor why it was
that I was under arrest.  If he were here he would have to confirm what
I say.  I can see him now, sitting on the chair belonging to that lady I
mentioned - a picture of dull-witted arrogance.  What do you think he
answered?  What he told me, gentlemen, was basically nothing at all;
perhaps he really did know nothing, he had placed me under arrest and
was satisfied.  In fact he had done more than that and brought three
junior employees from the bank where I work into the lady's room; they
had made themselves busy interfering with some photographs that belonged
to the lady and causing a mess.  There was, of course, another reason
for bringing these employees; they, just like my landlady and her maid,
were expected to spread the news of my arrest and damage my public
reputation and in particular to remove me from my position at the bank.
Well they didn't succeed in any of that, not in the slightest, even my
landlady, who is quite a simple person - and I will give you here her
name in full respect, her name is Mrs. Grubach - even Mrs. Grubach was
understanding enough to see that an arrest like this has no more
significance than an attack carried out on the street by some youths who
are not kept under proper control.  I repeat, this whole affair has
caused me nothing but unpleasantness and temporary irritation, but could
it not also have had some far worse consequences?"

        K. broke off here and looked at the judge, who said nothing.  As
he did so he thought he saw the judge use a movement of his eyes to give
a sign to someone in the crowd.  K. smiled and said, "And now the judge,
right next to me, is giving a secret sign to someone among you.  There
seems to be someone among you who is taking directions from above.  I
don't know whether the sign is meant to produce booing or applause, but
I'll resist trying to guess what its meaning is too soon.  It really
doesn't matter to me, and I give his lordship the judge my full and
public permission to stop giving secret signs to his paid subordinate
down there and give his orders in words instead; let him just say "Boo
now!," and then the next time "Clap now!".

        Whether it was embarrassment or impatience, the judge rocked
backwards and forwards on his seat.  The man behind him, whom he had
been talking with earlier, leant forward again, either to give him a few
general words of encouragement or some specific piece of advice.  Below
them in the hall the people talked to each other quietly but animatedly.
The two factions  had earlier seemed to hold views strongly opposed to
each other but now they began to intermingle, a few individuals pointed
up at K., others pointed at the judge.   The air in the room was fuggy
and extremely oppressive, those who were standing furthest away could
hardly even be seen through it.  It must have been especially
troublesome for those visitors who were in the gallery, as they were
forced to quietly ask the participants in the assembly what exactly was
happening, albeit with timid glances at the judge.  The replies they
received were just as quiet, and given behind the protection of a raised
hand.

        "I have nearly finished what I have to say," said K., and as there
was no bell available he struck the desk with his fist in a way that
startled the judge and his advisor and made them look up from each
other.  "None of this concerns me, and I am therefore able to make a calm
assessment of it, and, assuming that this so-called court is of any real
importance, it will be very much to your advantage to listen to what I
have to say.  If you want to discuss what I say, please don't bother to
write it down until later on, I don't have any time to waste and I'll
soon be leaving."

        There was immediate silence, which showed how well K. was in
control of the crowd.  There were no shouts among them as there had been
at the start, no-one even applauded, but if they weren't already
persuaded they seemed very close to it.

        K was pleased at the tension among all the people there as they
listened to him, a rustling rose from the silence which was more
invigorating than the most ecstatic applause could have been.  "There is
no doubt," he said quietly, "that there is some enormous organisation
determining what is said by this court.  In my case this includes my
arrest and the examination taking place here today, an organisation that
employs policemen who can be bribed, oafish supervisors and judges of
whom nothing better can be said than that they are not as arrogant as
some others.  This organisation even maintains a high-level judiciary
along with its train of countless servants, scribes, policemen and all
the other assistance that  it needs, perhaps even executioners and
torturers - I'm not afraid of using those words. And what, gentlemen, is
the purpose of this enormous organisation?  Its purpose is to arrest
innocent people and wage pointless prosecutions against them which, as
in my case, lead to no result.  How are we to avoid those in office
becoming deeply corrupt when everything is devoid of meaning?  That is
impossible, not even the highest judge would be able to achieve that for
himself.  That is why policemen try to steal the clothes off the back of
those they arrest, that is why supervisors break into the homes of
people they do not know, that is why innocent people are humiliated in
front of crowds rather than being given a proper trial.  The policemen
only talked about the warehouses where they put the property of those
they arrest, I would like to see these warehouses where the hard won
possessions of people under arrest is left to decay, if, that is, it's
not stolen by the thieving hands of the warehouse workers."

        K. was interrupted by a screeching from the far end of the hall,
he shaded his eyes to see that far, as the dull light of day made the
smoke whitish and hard to see through.  It was the washerwoman whom K.
had recognised as a likely source of disturbance as soon as she had
entered.  It was hard to see now whether it was her fault or not.  K.
could only see that a man had pulled her into a corner by the door and
was pressing himself against her.  But it was not her who was screaming,
but the man, he had opened his mouth wide and looked up at the ceiling.
A small circle had formed around the two of them, the visitors near him
in the gallery seemed delighted that the serious tone K. had introduced
into the gathering had been disturbed in this way.   K.'s first thought
was to run over there, and he also thought that everyone would want to
bring things back into order there or at least to make the pair leave
the room, but the first row of people in front of him stayed were they
were, no-one moved and no-one let K. through.  On the contrary, they
stood in his way, old men held out their arms in front of him and a hand
from somewhere - he did not have the time to turn round - took hold of
his collar.  K., by this time, had forgotten about the pair, it seemed
to him that his freedom was being limited as if his arrest was being
taken seriously, and, without any thought for what he was doing, he
jumped down from the podium.  Now he stood face to face with the crowd.
Had he judged the people properly?  Had he put too much faith in the
effect of his speech?  Had they been putting up a pretence all the time
he had been speaking, and now that he come to the end and to what must
follow, were they tired of pretending?  What faces they were, all around
him!  Dark, little eyes flickered here and there, cheeks drooped down
like on drunken men, their long beards were thin and stiff, if they took
hold of them it was more like they were making their hands into claws,
not as if they were taking hold of their own beards.  But underneath
those beards - and this was the real discovery made by K. - there were
badges of various sizes and colours shining on the collars of their
coats.  As far as he could see, every one of them was wearing one of
these badges.  All of them belonged to the same group, even though they
seemed to be divided to the right and the left of him, and when he
suddenly turned round he saw the same badge on the collar of the
examining judge who calmly looked down at him with his hands in his lap.
"So," called out K, throwing his arms in the air as if this sudden
realisation needed more room, "all of you are working for this
organisation, I see now that you are all the very bunch of cheats and
liars I've just been speaking about, you've all pressed yourselves in
here in order to listen in and snoop on me, you gave the impression of
having formed into factions, one of you even applauded me to test me
out, and you wanted to learn how to trap an innocent man!   Well, I hope
you haven't come here for nothing, I hope you've either had some fun
from someone who expected you to defend his innocence or else - let go
of me or I'll hit you," shouted K. to a quivery old man who had pressed
himself especially close to him - "or else that you've actually learned
something.  And so I wish you good luck in your trade."  He briskly took
his hat from where it lay on the edge of the table and, surrounded by a
silence caused perhaps by the completeness of their surprise, pushed his
way to the exit.  However, the examining judge seems to have moved even
more quickly than K., as he was waiting for him at the doorway.  "One
moment," he said.  K. stood where he was, but looked at the door with
his hand already on its handle rather than at the judge.  "I merely
wanted to draw your attention," said the judge, "to something you seem
not yet to be aware of: today, you have robbed yourself of the
advantages that a hearing of this sort always gives to someone who is
under arrest."  K. laughed towards the door.  "You bunch of louts," he
called, "you can keep all your hearings as a present from me," then
opened the door and hurried down the steps.  Behind him, the noise of
the assembly rose as it became lively once more and probably began to
discuss these events as if making a scientific study of them.




Chapter Three
 In the empty Courtroom - The Student - The Offices

        Every day over the following week, K. expected another summons to
arrive, he could not believe that his rejection of any more hearings had
been taken literally, and when the expected summons really had not come
by Saturday evening he took it to mean that he was expected, without
being told, to appear at the same place at the same time.  So on Sunday,
he set out once more in the same direction, going without hesitation up
the steps and through the corridors; some of the people remembered him
and greeted him from their doorways, but he no longer needed to ask
anyone the way and soon arrived at the right door.  It was opened as
soon as he knocked and, paying no attention to the woman he had seen
last time who was standing at the doorway, he was about to go straight
into the adjoining room when she said to him "There's no session today".
"What do you mean; no session?" he asked, unable to believe it.  But the
woman persuaded him by opening the door to the next room.  It was indeed
empty, and looked even more dismal empty than it had the previous
Sunday.  On the podium stood the table exactly as it had been before
with a few books laying on it.  "Can I have a look at those books?"
asked K., not because he was especially curious but so that he would not
have come for nothing.  "No," said the woman as she re-closed the door,
"that's not allowed.  Those books belong to the examining judge."  "I
see," said K., and nodded, "those books must be law books, and that's
how this court does things, not only to try people who are innocent but
even to try them without letting them know what's going on."  "I expect
you're right," said the woman, who had not understood exactly what he
meant.  "I'd better go away again, then," said K.
"Should I give a message to the examining judge?" asked the woman.  "Do
you know him, then?" asked K.  "Of course I know him," said the woman,
"my husband is the court usher."  It was only now that K. noticed that
the room, which before had held nothing but a wash-tub, had been fitted
out as a living room.  The woman saw how surprised he was and said,
"Yes, we're allowed to live here as we like, only we have to clear the
room out when the court's in session.  There's lots of disadvantages to
my husband's job."  "It's not so much the room that surprises me," said
K., looking at her crossly, "it's your being married that shocks me."
"Are you thinking about what happened last time the court was in
session, when I disturbed what you were saying?" asked the woman.  "Of
course," said K., "it's in the past now and I've nearly forgotten about
it, but at the time it made me furious.  And now you tell me yourself
that you are a married woman."  "It wasn't any disadvantage for you to
have your speech interrupted.  The way they talked about you after you'd
gone was really bad."  "That could well be," said K., turning away, "but
it does not excuse you."  "There's no-one I know who'd hold it against
me," said the woman. "Him, who put his arms around me, he's been chasing
after me for a long time.  I might not be very attractive for most
people, but I am for him.  I've got no protection from him, even my
husband has had to get used to it; if he wants to keep his job he's got
to put up with it as that man's a student and he'll almost certainly be
very powerful later on.  He's always after me, he'd only just left when
you arrived."  "That fits in with everything else," said K., "I'm not
surprised."  "Do you want to make things a bit better here?" the woman
asked slowly, watching him as if she were saying something that could be
as dangerous for K. as for herself.  "That's what I thought when I heard
you speak, I really liked what you said.  Mind you, I only heard part of
it, I missed the beginning of it and at the end I was lying on the floor
with the student - it's so horrible here," she said after a pause, and
took hold of K.'s hand.  "Do you believe you really will be able to make
things better?"  K. smiled and twisted his hand round a little in her
soft hands.  "It's really not my job to make things better here, as you
put it," he said, "and if you said that to the examining judge he would
laugh at you or punish you for it.  I really would not have become
involved in this matter if I could have helped it, and I would have lost
no sleep worrying about how this court needs to be made better.  But
because I'm told that I have been arrested - and I am under arrest - it
forces me to take some action, and to do so for my own sake.  However,
if I can be of some service to you in the process I will, of course, be
glad to do so.  And I will be glad to do so not only for the sake of
charity but also because you can be of some help to me."  "How could I
help you, then?" said the woman.  "You could, for example, show me the
books on the table there."  "Yes, certainly," the woman cried, and
pulled K. along behind her as she rushed to them.  The books were old
and well worn, the cover of one of them had nearly broken through in its
middle, and it was held together with a few threads.  "Everything is so
dirty here," said K., shaking his head, and before he could pick the
books up the woman wiped some of the dust off with her apron.  K. took
hold of the book that lay on top and threw it open, an indecent picture
appeared.  A man and a woman sat naked on a sofa, the base intent of
whoever drew it was easy to see but he had been so grossly lacking in
skill that all that anyone could really make out were the man and the
woman who dominated the picture with their bodies, sitting in overly
upright postures that created a false perspective and made it difficult
for them to approach each other.  K. didn't thumb through that book any
more, but just threw open the next one at its title page, it was a novel
with the title, What Grete Suffered from her Husband, Hans.  "So this is
the sort of law book they study here," said K., "this is the sort of
person sitting in judgement over me."  "I can help you," said the woman,
"would you like me to?"  "Could you really do that without placing
yourself in danger?  You did say earlier on that your husband is wholly
dependent on his superiors."  "I still want to help you," said the
woman, "come over here, we've got to talk about it.  Don't say any more
about what danger I'm in, I only fear danger where I want to fear it.
Come over here."  She pointed to the podium and invited him to sit down
on the step with her.  "You've got lovely dark eyes," she said after
they had sat down, looking up into K.'s face, "people say I've got nice
eyes too, but yours are much nicer.  It was the first thing I noticed
when you first came here.  That's even why I came in here, into the
assembly room, afterwards, I'd never normally do that, I'm not really
even allowed to."  So that's what all this is about, thought K., she's
offering herself to me, she's as degenerate as everything else around
here, she's had enough of the court officials, which is understandable I
suppose, and so she approaches any stranger and makes compliments about
his eyes.  With that, K. stood up in silence as if he had spoken his
thoughts out loud and thus explained his action to the woman.  "I don't
think you can be of any assistance to me," he said, "to be of any real
assistance you would need to be in contact with high officials.  But I'm
sure you only know the lower employees, and there are crowds of them
milling about here.  I'm sure you're very familiar with them and could
achieve a great deal through them, I've no doubt of that, but the most
that could be done through them would have no bearing at all on the
final outcome of the trial.  You, on the other hand, would lose some of
your friends as a result, and I have no wish of that.  Carry on with
these people in the same way as you have been, as it does seem to me to
be something you cannot do without.  I have no regrets in saying this
as, in return for your compliment to me, I also find you rather
attractive, especially when you look at me as sadly as you are now,
although you really have no reason to do so.  You belong to the people I
have to combat, and you're very comfortable among them, you're even in
love with the student, or if you don't love him you do at least prefer
him to your husband.  It's easy to see that from what you've been
saying."  "No!" she shouted, remained sitting where she was and grasped
K.'s hand, which he failed to pull away fast enough.  "You can't go away
now, you can't go away when you've misjudged me like that!  Are you
really capable of going away now?  Am I really so worthless that you
won't even do me the favour of staying a little bit longer?"  "You
misunderstand me," said K., sitting back down, "if it's really important
to you for me to stay here then I'll be glad to do so, I have plenty of
time, I came here thinking there would be a trial taking place.  All I
meant with what I said just now was to ask you not to do anything on my
behalf in the proceedings against me.  But even that is nothing for you
to worry about when you consider that there's nothing hanging on the
outcome of this trial, and that, whatever the verdict, I will just laugh
at it.  And that's even presupposing it ever even reaches any
conclusion, which I very much doubt.  I think it's much more likely that
the court officials will be too lazy, too forgetful, or even too fearful
ever to continue with these proceedings and that they will soon be
abandoned if they haven't been abandoned already.  It's even possible
that they will pretend to be carrying on with the trial in the hope of
receiving a large bribe, although I can tell you now that that will be
quite in vain as I pay bribes to no-one.  Perhaps one favour you could
do me would be to tell the examining judge, or anyone else who likes to
spread important news, that I will never be induced to pay any sort of
bribe through any stratagem of theirs - and I'm sure they have many
stratagems at their disposal.  There is no prospect of that, you can
tell them that quite openly.  And what's more, I expect they have
already noticed themselves, or even if they haven't, this affair is
really not so important to me as they think.  Those gentlemen would only
save some work for themselves, or at least some unpleasantness for me,
which, however, I am glad to endure if I know that each piece of
unpleasantness for me is a blow against them.  And I will make quite
sure it is a blow against them.  Do you actually know the judge?"
"Course I do," said the woman, "he was the first one I thought of when I
offered to help you.  I didn't know he's only a minor official, but if
you say so it must be true.  Mind you, I still think the report he gives
to his superiors must have some influence.  And he writes so many
reports.  You say these officials are lazy, but they're certainly not
all lazy, especially this examining judge, he writes ever such a lot.
Last Sunday, for instance, that session went on till the evening.
Everyone had gone, but the examining judge, he stayed in the hall, I had
to bring him a lamp in, all I had was a little kitchen lamp but he was
very satisfied with it and started to write straight away.  Meantime my
husband arrived, he always has the day off on Sundays, we got the
furniture back in and got our room sorted out and then a few of the
neighbours came, we sat and talked for a bit by a candle, in short, we
forgot all about the examining judge and went to bed.  All of a sudden
in the night, it must have been quite late in the night, I wakes up,
next to the bed, there's the examining judge shading the lamp with his
hand so that there's no light from it falls on my husband, he didn't
need to be as careful as that, the way my husband sleeps the light
wouldn't have woken him up anyway.  I was quite shocked and nearly
screamed, but the judge was very friendly, warned me I should be
careful, he whispered to me he's been writing all this time, and now
he's brought me the lamp back, and he'll never forget how I looked when
he found me there asleep.  What I mean, with all this, I just wanted to
tell you how the examining judge really does write lots of reports,
especially about you as questioning you was definitely one of the main
things on the agenda that Sunday.   If he writes reports as long as that
they must be of some importance.   And besides all that, you can see
from what happened that the examining judge is after me, and it's right
now, when he's first begun to notice me, that I can have a lot of
influence on him.  And I've got other proof I mean a lot to him, too.
Yesterday, he sent that student to me, the one he really trusts and who
he works with, he sent him with a present for me, silk stockings.  He
said it was because I clear up in the courtroom but that's only a
pretence, that job's no more than what I'm supposed to do, it's what my
husband gets paid for.  Nice stockings, they are, look," - she stretched
out her leg, drew her skirt up to her knee and looked, herself, at the
stocking - "they are nice stockings, but they're too good for me,
really."

        She suddenly interrupted herself and lay her hand on K.'s as if
she wanted to calm him down, and whispered, "Be quiet, Berthold is
watching us."  K. slowly looked up.  In the doorway to the courtroom
stood a young man, he was short, his legs were not quite straight, and
he continually moved his finger round in a short, thin, red beard with
which he hoped to make himself look dignified.  K. looked at him with
some curiosity, he was the first student he had ever met of the
unfamiliar discipline of jurisprudence, face to face at least, a man who
would even most likely attain high office one day.  The student, in
contrast, seemed to take no notice of K. at all, he merely withdrew his
finger from his beard long enough to beckon to the woman and went over
to the window, the woman leant over to K. and whispered, "Don't be cross
with me, please don't, and please don't think ill of me either, I've got
to go to him now, to this horrible man, just look at his bent legs.  But
I'll come straight back and then I'll go with you if you'll take me,
I'll go wherever you want, you can do whatever you like with me, I'll be
happy if I can be away from here for as long as possible, it'd be best
if I could get away from here for good."  She stroked K.'s hand once
more, jumped up and ran over to the window.  Before he realised it, K.
grasped for her hand but failed to catch it.   He really was attracted
to the woman, and even after thinking hard about it could find no good
reason why he should not give in to her allure.  It briefly crossed his
mind that the woman meant to entrap him on behalf of the court, but that
was an objection he had no difficulty in fending off.  In what way could
she entrap him?  Was he not still free, so free that he could crush the
entire court whenever he wanted, as least where it concerned him?  Could
he not have that much confidence in himself?  And her offer of help
sounded sincere, and maybe it wasn't quite worthless.  And maybe there
was no better revenge against the examining judge and his cronies than
to take this woman from him and have her for himself.  Maybe then, after
much hard work writing dishonest reports about K., the judge would go to
the woman's bed late one night and find it empty.  And it would be empty
because she belonged to K., because this woman at the window, this lush,
supple, warm body in its sombre clothes of rough, heavy material
belonged to him, totally to him and to him alone.  Once he had settled
his thoughts towards the woman in this way, he began to find the quiet
conversation at the window was taking too long, he rapped on the podium
with his knuckles, and then even with his fist.  The student briefly
looked away from the woman to glance at K. over his shoulder but did
allow himself to be disturbed, in fact he even pressed himself close to
the woman and put his arms around her.  She dropped her head down low as
if listening to him carefully, as she did so he kissed her right on the
neck, hardly even interrupting what he was saying.   K. saw this as
confirmation of the tyranny the student held over the woman and which
she had already complained about, he stood up and walked up and down the
room.  Glancing sideways at the student, he wondered what would be the
quickest possible way to get rid of him, and so it was not unwelcome to
him when the student, clearly disturbed by K.'s to-ing and fro-ing which
K. had now developed into a stamping up and down, said to him,
"You don't have to stay here, you know, if you're getting impatient.
You could have gone earlier, no-one would have missed you.  In fact you
should have gone, you should have left as quickly as possible as soon as
I got here."  This comment could have caused all possible rage to break
out between them, but K. also bore in mind that this was a prospective
court official speaking to a disfavoured defendant, and he might well
have been taking pride in speaking in this way.  K. remained standing
quite close to him and said with a smile, "You're quite right, I am
impatient, but the easiest way to settle this impatience would be if you
left us.  On the other hand, if you've come here to study - you are a
student, I hear - I'll be quite happy to leave the room to you and go
away with the woman.  I'm sure you'll still have a lot of study to do
before you're made into a judge.  It's true that I'm still not all that
familiar with your branch of jurisprudence but I take it it involves a
lot more than speaking roughly - and I see you have no shame in doing
that extremely well."  "He shouldn't have been allowed to move about so
freely," said the student, as if he wanted to give the woman an
explanation for K.'s insults, "that was a mistake.  I've told the
examining judge so.  He should at least have been detained in his room
between hearings.  Sometimes it's impossible to understand what the
judge thinks he's doing."
"You're wasting your breath," said K., then he reached his hand out
towards the woman and said, "come with me."  "So that's it," said the
student, "oh no, you're not going to get her," and with a strength you
would not have expected from him, he glanced tenderly at her, lifted her
up on one arm and, his back bent under the weight, ran with her to the
door.  In this way he showed, unmistakeably, that he was to some extent
afraid of K., but he nonetheless dared to provoke him still further by
stroking and squeezing the woman's arm with his free hand.  K. ran the
few steps up to him, but when he had reached him and was about to take
hold of him and, if necessary, throttle him, the woman said, "It's no
good, it's the examining judge who's sent for me, I daren't go with you,
this little bastard..." and here she ran her hand over the student's
face, "this little bastard won't let me."  "And you don't want to be set
free!" shouted K., laying his hand on the student's shoulder, who then
snapped at it with his teeth.  "No!" shouted the woman, pushing K. away
with both hands, "no, no don't do that, what d'you think you're doing!?
That'd be the end of me.  Let go of him, please just let go of him.
He's only carrying out the judge's orders, he's carrying me to him."
"Let him take you then, and I want to see nothing more of you," said K.,
enraged by his disappointment and giving the student a thump in the back
so that he briefly stumbled and then, glad that he had not fallen,
immediately jumped up all the higher with his burden.  K. followed them
slowly.  He realised that this was the first unambiguous setback he had
suffered from these people.  It was of course nothing to worry about, he
accepted the setback only because he was looking for a fight.  If he
stayed at home and carried on with his normal life he would be a
thousand times superior to these people and could get any of them out of
his way just with a kick.  And he imagined the most laughable scene
possible as an example of this, if this contemptible student, this
inflated child, this knock-kneed redbeard, if he were kneeling at Elsa's
bed wringing his hands and begging for forgiveness.  K. so enjoyed
imagining this scene that he decided to take the student along to Elsa
with him if ever he should get the opportunity.

        K. was curious to see where the woman would be taken and he
hurried over to the door, the student was not likely to carry her
through the streets on his arm.  It turned out that the journey was far
shorter.  Directly opposite the flat there was a narrow flight of wooden
steps which probably led up to the attic, they turned as they went so
that it was not possible to see where they ended.  The student carried
the woman up these steps, and after the exertions of running with her he
was soon groaning and moving very slowly.  The woman waved down at K.
and by raising and lowering her shoulders she tried to show that she was
an innocent party in this abduction, although the gesture did not show a
lot of regret.  K. watched her without expression like a stranger, he
wanted to show neither that he was disappointed nor that he would easily
get over his disappointment.

        The two of them had disappeared, but K. remained standing in the
doorway.  He had to accept that the woman had not only cheated him but
that she had also lied to him when she said she was being taken to the
examining judge.  The examining judge certainly wouldn't be sitting and
waiting in the attic.  The wooden stairs would explain nothing to him
however long he stared at them.  Then K. noticed a small piece of paper
next to them, went across to it and read, in a childish and unpractised
hand, "Entrance to the Court Offices".  Were the court offices here, in
the attic of this tenement, then?  If that was how they were
accommodated it did not attract much respect, and it was some comfort
for the accused to realise how little money this court had at its
disposal if it had to locate its offices in a place where the tenants of
the building, who were themselves among the poorest of people, would
throw their unneeded junk.  On the other hand, it was possible that the
officials  had enough money but that they squandered it on themselves
rather than use it for the court's purposes.  Going by K.'s experience
of them so far, that even seemed probable, except that if the court were
allowed to decay in that way it would not just humiliate the accused but
also give him more encouragement than if the court were simply  in a
state of poverty.  K. also now understood that the court was ashamed to
summon those it accused to the attic of this building for the initial
hearing, and why it preferred to impose upon them in their own homes.
What a position it was that K. found himself in, compared with the judge
sitting up in the attic!  K., at the bank, had a big office with an
ante-room, and had an enormous window through which he could look down
at the activity in the square.  It was true, though, that he had no
secondary income from bribes and fraud, and he couldn't tell a servant
to bring him a woman up to the office on his arm.  K., however, was
quite willing to do without such things, in this life at least.  K. was
still looking at the notice when a man came up the stairs, looked
through the open door into the living room where it was also possible to
see the courtroom, and finally asked K. whether he had just seen a woman
there.  "You're the court usher, aren't you?" asked K.  "That's right,"
said the man, "oh, yes, you're defendant K., I recognise you now as
well.  Nice to see you here."  And he offered K. his hand, which was far
from what K. had expected.  And when K. said nothing, he added, "There's
no court session planned for today, though."  "I know that," said K. as
he looked at the usher's civilian coat which, beside its ordinary
buttons, displayed two gilded ones as the only sign of his office and
seemed to have been taken from an old army officer's coat.  "I was
speaking with your wife a little while ago.  She is no longer here.  The
student has carried her off to the examining judge."  "Listen to this,"
said the usher, "they're always carrying her away from me.  It's Sunday
today, and it's not part of my job to do any work today, but they send
me off with some message which isn't even necessary just to get me away
from here.  What they do is they send me off not too far away so that I
can still hope to get back on time if I really hurry.  So off I go
running as fast as I can, shout the message through the crack in the
door of the office I've been sent to, so out of breath they'll hardly be
able to understand it, run back here again, but the student's been even
faster than I have - well he's got less far to go, he's only got to run
down the steps.  If I wasn't so dependent on them I'd have squashed the
student against the wall here a long time ago.  Right here, next to the
sign.  I'm always dreaming of doing that.  Just here, just above the
floor, that's where he's crushed onto the wall, his arms stretched out,
his fingers spread apart, his crooked legs twisted round into a circle
and blood squirted out all around him.  It's only ever been a dream so
far, though."  "Is there nothing else you do?" asked K. with a smile.
"Nothing that I know of," said the usher.  "And it's going to get even
worse now, up till now he's only been carrying her off for himself, now
he's started carrying her off for the judge and all, just like I'd
always said he would."  "Does your wife, then, not share some of the
responsibility?" asked K.  He had to force himself as he asked this
question, as he, too, felt so jealous now.  "Course she does," said the
usher, "it's more her fault than theirs.  It was her who attached
herself to him.  All he did, he just chases after any woman.  There's
five flats in this block alone where he's been thrown out after working
his way in there.  And my wife is the best looking woman in the whole
building, but it's me who's not even allowed to defend himself."  "If
that's how things are, then there's nothing that can be done," said K.
"Well why not?" asked the usher.  "He's a coward that student, if he
wants to lay a finger on my wife all you'd have to do is give him such a
good hiding he'd never dare do it again.  But I'm not allowed to do
that, and nobody else is going to do me the favour as they're all afraid
of his power.  The only one who could do it is a man like you."  "What,
how could I do it?" asked K. in astonishment.
"Well you're facing a charge, aren't you," said the usher.  "Yes, but
that's all the more reason for me to be afraid.  Even if he has no
influence on the outcome of the trial he probably has some on the
initial examination."  "Yes, exactly," said the usher, as if K.'s view
had been just as correct as his own.  "Only we don't usually get any
trials heard here with no hope at all."  "I am not of the same opinion",
said K., "although that ought not to prevent me from dealing with the
student if the opportunity arises."  "I would be very grateful to you,"
said the usher of the court, somewhat formally, not really seeming to
believe that his highest wish could be fulfilled.  "Perhaps," continued
K., "perhaps there are some other officials of yours here, perhaps all
of them, who would deserve the same."  "Oh yes, yes," said the usher, as
if this was a matter of course.  Then he looked at K. trustingly which,
despite all his friendliness, he had not done until then, and added,
"they're always rebelling."  But the conversation seemed to have become
a little uncomfortable for him, as he broke it off by saying, "now I
have to report to the office.  Would you like to come with me?"
"There's nothing for me to do there," said K.
"You'd be able to have a look at it.  No-one will take any notice of
you."  "Is it worth seeing then?" asked K. hesitatingly, although he
felt very keen to go with him.  "Well," said the usher, "I thought you'd
be interested in it."  "Alright then," said K. finally, "I'll come with
you."  And, quicker than the usher himself, he ran up the steps.

        At the entrance he nearly fell over, as behind the door there was
another step. "They don't show much concern for the public," he said.
"They don't show any concern at all," said the usher, "just look at the
waiting room here."  It consisted of a long corridor from which roughly
made doors led out to the separate departments of the attic.  There was
no direct source of light but it was not entirely dark as many of the
departments, instead of solid walls, had just wooden bars reaching up to
the ceiling to separate them from the corridor.  The light made its way
in through them, and it was also possible to see individual officials
through them as they sat writing at their desks or stood up at the
wooden frameworks and watched the people on the corridor through the
gaps.  There were only a few people in the corridor, probably because it
was Sunday.  They were not very impressive.  They sat, equally spaced,
on two rows of long wooden benches which had been placed along both
sides of the corridor.  All of them were carelessly dressed although the
expressions on their faces, their bearing, the style of their beards and
many details which were hard to identify showed that they belonged to
the upper classes.  There were no coat hooks for them to use, and so
they had placed their hats under the bench, each probably having
followed the example of the others.  When those who were sitting nearest
the door saw K. and the usher of the court they stood up to greet them,
and when the others saw that, they also thought they had to greet them,
so that as the two of them went by all the people there stood up.  None
of them stood properly upright, their backs were bowed, their knees
bent, they stood like beggars on the street.  K. waited for the usher,
who was following just behind him.  "They must all be very dispirited,"
he said.  "Yes," said the usher, "they are the accused, everyone you see
here has been accused."  "Really!" said K.  "They're colleagues of mine
then."  And he turned to the nearest one, a tall, thin man with hair
that was nearly grey.  "What is it you are waiting for here?" asked K.,
politely, but the man was startled at being spoken to unexpectedly,
which was all the more pitiful to see because the man clearly had some
experience of the world and elsewhere would certainly have been able to
show his superiority and would not have easily given up the advantage he
had acquired.  Here, though, he did not know what answer to give to such
a simple question and looked round at the others as if they were under
some obligation to help him, and as if no-one could expect any answer
from him without this help.  Then the usher of the court stepped forward
to him and, in order to calm him down and raise his spirits, said, "The
gentleman here's only asking what it is you're waiting for.  You can
give him an answer."  The voice of the usher was probably familiar to
him, and had a better effect than K.'s.  "I'm ... I'm waiting ..." he
began, and then came to a halt.  He had clearly chosen this beginning so
that he could give a precise answer to the question, but now he didn't
know how to continue.  Some of the others waiting had come closer and
stood round the group, the usher of the court said to them, "Get out the
way, keep the gangway free."  They moved back slightly, but not as far
as where they had been sitting before.  In the meantime, the man whom K.
had first approached had pulled himself together and even answered him
with a smile.
"A month ago I made some applications for evidence to be heard in my
case, and I'm waiting for it to be settled."  "You certainly seem to be
going to a lot of effort," said K.  "Yes," said the man, "it is my
affair after all."  "Not everyone thinks the same way as you do," said
K. "I've been indicted as well but I swear on my soul that I've neither
submitted evidence nor done anything else of the sort.  Do you really
think that's necessary?"  "I don't really know, exactly," said the man,
once more totally unsure of himself; he clearly thought K. was joking
with him and therefore probably thought it best to repeat his earlier
answer in order to avoid making any new mistakes.  With K. looking at
him impatiently, he just said, "as far as I'm concerned, I've applied to
have this evidence heard."  "Perhaps you don't believe I've been
indicted?" asked K.  "Oh, please, I certainly do," said the man,
stepping slightly to one side, but there was more anxiety in his answer
than belief.  "You don't believe me then?" asked K., and took hold of
his arm, unconsciously prompted by the man's humble demeanour, and as if
he wanted to force him to believe him.  But he did not want to hurt the
man and had only taken hold of him very lightly.  Nonetheless, the man
cried out as if K. had grasped him not with two fingers but with red hot
tongs.  Shouting in this ridiculous way finally made K. tired of him, if
he didn't believe he was indicted then so much the better; maybe he even
thought K. was a judge.  And before leaving, he held him a lot harder,
shoved him back onto the bench and walked on.  "These defendants are so
sensitive, most of them," said the usher of the court.  Almost all of
those who had been waiting had now assembled around the man who, by now,
had stopped shouting and they seemed to be asking him lots of precise
questions about the incident.  K. was approached by a security guard,
identifiable mainly by his sword, of which the scabbard seemed to be
made of aluminium.  This greatly surprised K., and he reached out for it
with his hand.  The guard had come because of the shouting and asked
what had been happening.  The usher of the court said a few words to try
and calm him down but the guard explained that he had to look into it
himself, saluted, and hurried on, walking with very short steps,
probably because of gout.

        K. didn't concern himself long with the guard or these people,
especially as he saw a turning off the corridor, about half way along it
on the right hand side, where there was no door to stop him going that
way.  He asked the usher whether that was the right way to go, the usher
nodded, and that is the way that K. went.  The usher remained always one
or two steps behind K, which he found irritating as in a place like this
it could give the impression that he was being driven along by someone
who had arrested him, so he frequently waited for the usher to catch up,
but the usher always remained behind him.  In order to put an end to his
discomfort, K. finally said, "Now that I've seen what it looks like
here, I'd like to go."  "You haven't seen everything yet," said the
usher ingenuously.
"I don't want to see everything," said K., who was also feeling very
tired, "I want to go, what is the way to the exit?"  "You haven't got
lost, have you?" asked the usher in amazement, "you go down this way to
the corner, then right down the corridor straight ahead as far as the
door."  "Come with me," said K., "show me the way, I'll miss it, there
are so many different ways here."  "It's the only way there is," said
the usher, who had now started to sound quite reproachful, "I can't go
back with you again, I've got to hand in my report, and I've already
lost a lot of time because of you as it is."  "Come with me!" K.
repeated, now somewhat sharper as if he had finally caught the usher out
in a lie.  "Don't shout like that," whispered the usher, "there's
offices all round us here.  If you don't want to go back by yourself
come on a bit further with me or else wait here till I've sorted out my
report, then I'll be glad to go back with you again."  "No, no," said
K., "I will not wait and you must come with me now."  K. had still not
looked round at anything at all in the room where he found himself, and
it was only when one of the many wooden doors all around him opened that
he noticed it.  A young woman, probably summoned by the loudness of K.'s
voice, entered and asked, "What is it the gentleman wants?"  In the
darkness behind her there was also a man approaching.  K. looked at the
usher.  He had, after all, said that no-one would take any notice of K.,
and now there were two people coming, it only needed a few and everyone
in the office would become aware of him and asking for explanations as
to why he was there.  The only understandable and acceptable thing to
say was that he was accused of something and wanted to know the date of
his next hearing, but this was an explanation he did not want to give,
especially as it was not true - he had only come out of curiosity.  Or
else, an explanation even less usable, he could say that he wanted to
ascertain that the court was as revolting on the inside as it was on the
outside.  And it did seem that he had been quite right in this
supposition, he had no wish to intrude any deeper, he was disturbed
enough by what he had seen already, he was not in the right frame of
mind just then to face a high official such as might appear from behind
any door, and he wanted to go, either with the usher of the court or, if
needs be, alone.

        But he must have seemed very odd standing there in silence, and
the young woman and the usher were indeed looking at him as if they
thought he would go through some major metamorphosis any second which
they didn't want to miss seeing.  And in the doorway stood the man whom
K. had noticed in the background earlier, he held firmly on to the beam
above the low door swinging a little on the tips of his feet as if
becoming impatient as he watched.  But the young woman was the first to
recognise that K.'s behaviour was caused by his feeling slightly unwell,
she brought a chair and asked,
"Would you not like to sit down?"  K. sat down immediately and, in order
to keep his place better, put his elbows on the armrests.  "You're a
little bit dizzy, aren't you?" she asked him.  Her face was now close in
front of him, it bore the severe expression that many young women have
just when they're in the bloom of their youth.  "It's nothing for you to
worry about," she said, "that's nothing unusual here, almost everyone
gets an attack like that the first time they come here.  This is your
first time is it?  Yes, it's nothing unusual then.  The sun burns down
on the roof and the hot wood makes the air so thick and heavy.  It makes
this place rather unsuitable for offices, whatever other advantages it
might offer.  But the air is almost impossible to breathe on days when
there's a lot of business, and that's almost every day.  And when you
think that there's a lot of washing put out to dry here as well - and we
can't stop the tenants doing that - it's not surprising you started to
feel unwell.  But you get used to the air alright in the end.  When
you're here for the second or third time you'll hardly notice how
oppressive the air is.  Are you feeling any better now?"  K. made no
answer, he felt too embarrassed at being put at the mercy of these
people by his sudden weakness, and learning the reason for feeling ill
made him feel not better but a little worse.  The girl noticed it
straight away, and to make the air fresher for K., she took a window
pole that was leaning against the wall and pushed open a small hatch
directly above K.'s head that led to the outside.  But so much soot fell
in that the girl had to immediately close the hatch again and clean the
soot off K.'s hands with her handkerchief, as K. was too tired to do
that for himself.  He would have liked just to sit quietly where he was
until he had enough strength to leave, and the less fuss people made
about him the sooner that would be.  But then the girl said, "You can't
stay here, we're in people's way here ..."  K. looked at her as if to
ask whose way they were impeding.  "If you like, I can take you to the
sick room," and turning to the man in the doorway said, "please help
me".  The man immediately came over to them, but K. did not want to go
to the sick room, that was just what he wanted to avoid, being led
further from place to place, the further he went the more difficult it
must become.  So he said, "I am able to walk now," and stood up, shaking
after becoming used to sitting so comfortably.  But then he was unable
to stay upright. "I can't manage it," he said shaking his head, and sat
down again with a sigh.  He remembered the usher who, despite
everything, would have been able to lead him out of there but who seemed
to have gone long before.  K. looked out between the man and the young
woman who were standing in front of him but was unable to find the
usher.  "I think," said the man, who was elegantly dressed and whose
appearance was made especially impressive with a grey waistcoat that had
two long, sharply tailored points, "the gentleman is feeling unwell
because of the atmosphere here, so the best thing, and what he would
most prefer, would be not to take him to the sick room but get him out
of the offices altogether."  "That's right," exclaimed K., with such joy
that he nearly interrupted what the man was saying, "I'm sure that'll
make me feel better straight away, I'm really not that weak, all I need
is a little support under my arms, I won't cause you much trouble, it's
not such a long way anyway, lead me to the door and then I'll sit on the
stairs for a while and soon recover, as I don't suffer from attacks like
this at all, I'm surprised at it myself.  I also work in an office and
I'm quite used to office air, but here it seems to be too strong, you've
said so yourselves.  So please, be so kind as to help me on my way a
little, I'm feeling dizzy, you see, and it'll make me ill if I stand up
by myself."  And with that he raised his shoulders to make it easier for
the two of them to take him by the arms.

        The man, however, didn't follow this suggestion but just stood
there with his hands in his trouser pockets and laughed out loud.
"There, you see," he said to the girl, "I was quite right.  The
gentleman is only unwell here, and not in general."  The young woman
smiled too, but lightly tapped the man's arm with the tips of her
fingers as if he had allowed himself too much fun with K.  "So what do
you think, then?" said the man, still laughing, "I really do want to
lead the gentleman out of here."  "That's alright, then," said the girl,
briefly inclining her charming head.  "Don't worry too much about him
laughing," said the girl to K., who had become unhappy once more and
stared quietly in front of himself as if needing no further explanation.
"This gentleman - may I introduce you?" - (the man gave his permission
with a wave of the hand) - "so, this gentleman's job is to give out
information.  He gives all the information they need to people who are
waiting, as our court and its offices are not very well known among the
public he gets asked for quite a lot.  He has an answer for every
question, you can try him out if you feel like it.  But that's not his
only distinction, his other distinction is his elegance of dress.  We,
that's to say all of us who work in the offices here, we decided that
the information-giver would have to be elegantly dressed as he
continually has to deal with the litigants and he's the first one they
meet, so he needs to give a dignified first impression.  The rest of us
I'm afraid, as you can see just by looking at me, dress very badly and
old-fashioned; and there's not much point in spending much on clothes
anyway, as we hardly ever leave the offices, we even sleep here.  But,
as I said, we decided that the information-giver would have to have nice
clothes.  As the management here is rather peculiar in this respect, and
they would get them for us, we had a collection - some of the litigants
contributed too - and bought him these lovely clothes and some others
besides.  So everything would be ready for him to give a good
impression, except that he spoils it again by laughing and frightening
people."  "That's how it is," said the man, mocking her, "but I don't
understand why it is that you're explaining all our intimate facts to
the gentleman, or rather why it is that you're pressing them on him, as
I'm sure he's not all interested.  Just look at him sitting there, it's
clear he's occupied with his own affairs."  K. just did not feel like
contradicting him. The girl's intention may have been good, perhaps she
was under instructions to distract him or to give him the chance to
collect himself, but the attempt had not worked.  "I had to explain to
him why you were laughing," said the girl.  "I suppose it was
insulting."  "I think he would forgive even worse insults if I finally
took him outside."  K. said nothing, did not even look up, he tolerated
the two of them negotiating over him like an object, that was even what
suited him best.  But suddenly he felt the information-giver's hand on
one arm and the young woman's hand on the other.  "Up you get then,
weakling," said the information-giver.  "Thank you both very much," said
K., pleasantly surprised, as he slowly rose and personally guided these
unfamiliar hands to the places where he most needed support.
As they approached the corridor, the girl said quietly into K.'s ear, "I
must seem to think it's very important to show the information-giver in
a good light, but you shouldn't doubt what I say, I just want to say the
truth.  He isn't hard-hearted.  It's not really his job to help
litigants outside if they're unwell but he's doing it anyway, as you can
see.  I don't suppose any of us is hard-hearted, perhaps we'd all like
to be helpful, but working for the court offices it's easy for us to
give the impression we are hard-hearted and don't want to help anyone.
It makes me quite sad."  "Would you not like to sit down here a while?"
asked the information-giver, there were already in the corridor and just
in front of the defendant whom K. had spoken to earlier.  K. felt almost
ashamed to be seen by him, earlier he had stood so upright in front of
him and now he had to be supported by two others, his hat was held up by
the information-giver balanced on outstretched fingers, his hair was
dishevelled and hung down onto the sweat on his forehead.  But the
defendant seemed to notice nothing of what was going on and just stood
there humbly, as if wanting to apologise to the information-giver for
being there. The information-giver looked past him.  "I know," he said,
"that my case can't be settled today, not yet, but I've come in anyway,
I thought, I thought I could wait here anyway, it's Sunday today, I've
got plenty of time, and I'm not disturbing anyone here."  "There's no
need to be so apologetic," said the information-giver, "it's very
commendable for you to be so attentive.  You are taking up space here
when you don't need to but as long as you don't get in my way I will do
nothing to stop you following the progress of your case as closely as
you like.  When one has seen so many people who shamefully neglect their
cases one learns to show patience with people like you.   Do sit down."
"He's very good with the litigants," whispered the girl.  K. nodded, but
started to move off again when the information-giver repeated, "Would
you not like to sit down here a while?"  "No," said K., "I don't want to
rest."  He had said that as decisively as he could, but in fact it
would have done him a lot of good to sit down.  It was as if he were
suffering sea-sickness.  He felt as if he were on a ship in a rough sea,
as if the water were hitting against the wooden walls, a thundering from
the depths of the corridor as if the torrent were crashing over it, as
if the corridor were swaying and the waiting litigants on each side of
it rising and sinking.  It made the calmness of the girl and the man
leading him all the more incomprehensible.  He was at their mercy, if
they let go of him he would fall like a board.  Their little eyes
glanced here and there, K. could feel the evenness of their steps but
could not do the same, as from step to step he was virtually being
carried.  He finally noticed they were speaking to him but he did not
understand them, all he heard was a noise that filled all the space and
through which there seemed to be an unchanging higher note sounding,
like a siren.  "Louder," he whispered with his head sunk low, ashamed at
having to ask them to speak louder when he knew they had spoken loudly
enough, even if it had been, for him, incomprehensible.  At last, a
draught of cool air blew in his face as if a gap had been torn out in
the wall in front of him, and next to him he heard someone say, "First
he says he wants to go, and then you can tell him a hundred times that
this is the way out and he doesn't move."  K. became aware that he was
standing in front of the way out, and that the young woman had opened
the door.  It seemed to him that all his strength returned to him at
once, and to get a foretaste of freedom he stepped straight on to one of
the stairs and took his leave there of his companions, who bowed to him.
"Thank you very much," he repeated, shook their hands once more and did
not let go until he thought he saw that they found it hard to bear the
comparatively fresh air from the stairway after being so long used to
the air in the offices.  They were hardly able to reply, and the young
woman might even have fallen over if K. had not shut the door extremely
fast.  K. then stood still for a while, combed his hair with the help of
a pocket mirror, picked up his hat from the next stair - the
information-giver must have thrown it down there - and then he ran down
the steps so fresh and in such long leaps that the contrast with his
previous state nearly frightened him.  His normally sturdy state of
health had never prepared him for surprises such as this.  Did his body
want to revolt and cause him a new trial as he was bearing the old one
with such little effort?  He did not quite reject the idea that he
should see a doctor the next time he had the chance, but whatever he did
- and this was something on which he could advise himself - he wanted to
spend all Sunday mornings in future better than he had spent this one.




Chapter Four
Miss Bürstner's Friend

        For some time after this, K. found it impossible to exchange even
just a few words with Miss Bürstner.  He tried to reach her in many and
various ways but she always found a way to avoid it.  He would come
straight home from the office, remain in her room without the light on,
and sit on the sofa with nothing more to distract him than keeping watch
on the empty hallway.  If the maid went by and closed the door of the
apparently empty room he would get up after a while and open it again.
He got up an hour earlier than usual in the morning so that he might
perhaps find Miss Bürstner alone as she went to the office.  But none of
these efforts brought any success.  Then he wrote her a letter, both to
the office and the flat, attempting once more to justify his behaviour,
offered to make whatever amends he could, promised never to cross
whatever boundary she might set him and begged merely to have the chance
to speak to her some time, especially as he was unable to do anything
with Mrs. Grubach either until he had spoken with Miss Bürstner, he
finally informed her that the following Sunday he would stay in his room
all day waiting for a sign from her that there was some hope of his
request being fulfilled, or at least that she would explain to him why
she could not fulfil it even though he had promised to observe whatever
stipulations she might make.  The letters were not returned, but there
was no answer either.  However, on the following Sunday there was a sign
that seemed clear enough.  It was still early when K. noticed, through
the keyhole, that there was an unusual level of activity in the hallway
which soon abated.  A French teacher, although she was German and called
Montag, a pale and febrile girl with a slight limp who had previously
occupied a room of her own, was moving into Miss Bürstner's room.  She
could be seen shuffling through the hallway for several hours, there was
always another piece of clothing or a blanket or a book that she had
forgotten and had to be fetched specially and brought into the new home.

        When Mrs. Grubach brought K. his breakfast - ever since the time
when she had made K. so cross she didn't trust the maid to do the
slightest job - he had no choice but to speak to her, for the first time
in five days.  "Why is there so much noise in the hallway today?" he
asked as she poured his coffee out, "Can't something be done about it?
Does this clearing out have to be done on a Sunday?"  K. did not look up
at Mrs. Grubach, but he saw nonetheless that she seemed to feel some
relief as she breathed in.  Even sharp questions like this from Mr. K.
she perceived as forgiveness, or as the beginning of forgiveness.
"We're not clearing anything out, Mr. K.," she said, "it's just that
Miss Montag is moving in with Miss Bürstner and is moving her things
across."  She said nothing more, but just waited to see how K. would
take it and whether he would allow her to carry on speaking.  But K.
kept her in uncertainty, took the spoon and pensively stirred his coffee
while he remained silent.  Then he looked up at her and said, "What
about the suspicions you had earlier about Miss Bürstner, have you given
them up?"  "Mr. K.," called Mrs. Grubach, who had been waiting for this
very question, as she put her hands together and held them out towards
him.  "I just made a chance remark and you took it so badly.  I didn't
have the slightest intention of offending anyone, not you or anyone
else.  You've known me for long enough, Mr. K., I'm sure you're
convinced of that.  You don't know how I've been suffering for the past
few days!  That I should tell lies about my tenants!  And you, Mr. K.,
you believed it!  And said I should give you notice!  Give you notice!"
At this last outcry, Mrs. Grubach was already choking back her tears,
she raised her apron to her face and blubbered out loud.

        "Oh, don't cry Mrs. Grubach," said K., looking out the window, he
was thinking only of Miss Bürstner and how she was accepting an unknown
girl into her room.  "Now don't cry," he said again as he turned his
look back into the room where Mrs. Grubach was still crying.  "I meant
no harm either when I said that.  It was simply a misunderstanding
between us.  That can happen even between old friends sometimes."  Mrs.
Grubach pulled her apron down to below her eyes to see whether K. really
was attempting a reconciliation.  "Well, yes, that's how it is," said
K., and as Mrs. Grubach's behaviour indicated that the captain had said
nothing he dared to add, "Do you really think, then, that I'd want to
make an enemy of you for the sake of a girl we hardly know?" "Yes,
you're quite right, Mr. K.," said Mrs. Grubach, and then, to her
misfortune, as soon as she felt just a little freer to speak, she added
something rather inept.  "I kept asking myself why it was that Mr. K.
took such an interest in Miss Bürstner.  Why does he quarrel with me
over her when he knows that any cross word from him and I can't sleep
that night?  And I didn't say anything about Miss Bürstner that I hadn't
seen with my own eyes."  K. said nothing in reply, he should have chased
her from the room as soon as she had opened her mouth, and he didn't
want to do that.  He contented himself with merely drinking his coffee
and letting Mrs. Grubach feel that she was superfluous.  Outside, the
dragging steps of Miss Montag could still be heard as she went from one
side of the hallway to the other.  "Do you hear that?" asked K. pointing
his hand at the door.  "Yes," said Mrs. Grubach with a sigh, "I wanted
to give her some help and I wanted the maid to help her too but she's
stubborn, she wants to move everything in herself.  I wonder at Miss
Bürstner.  I often feel it's a burden for me to have Miss Montag as a
tenant but Miss Bürstner accepts her into her room with herself."
"There's nothing there for you to worry about" said K., crushing the
remains of a sugar lump in his cup.  "Does she cause you any trouble?"
"No," said Mrs. Grubach, "in itself it's very good to have her there, it
makes another room free for me and I can let my nephew, the captain,
occupy it.  I began to worry he might be disturbing you when I had to
let him live in the living room next to you over the last few days.
He's not very considerate."  "What an idea!" said K. standing up,
"there's no question of that.  You seem to think that because I can't
stand this to-ing and fro-ing of Miss Montag that I'm over-sensitive -
and there she goes back again."  Mrs. Grubach appeared quite powerless.
"Should I tell her to leave moving the rest of her things over till
later, then, Mr. K.?  If that's what you want I'll do it immediately."
"But she has to move in with Miss Bürstner!" said K.  "Yes," said Mrs.
Grubach, without quite understanding what K. meant.  "So she has to take
her things over there."  Mrs. Grubach just nodded.  K. was irritated all
the more by this dumb helplessness which, seen from the outside, could
have seemed like a kind of defiance on her part.  He began to walk up
and down the room between the window and the door, thus depriving Mrs.
Grubach of the chance to leave, which she otherwise probably would have
done.

        Just as K. once more reached the door, someone knocked at it.  It
was the maid, to say that Miss Montag would like to have a few words
with Mr. K., and therefore requested that he come to the dining room
where she was waiting for him.  K. heard the maid out thoughtfully, and
then looked back at the shocked Mrs. Grubach in a way that was almost
contemptuous.  His look seemed to be saying that K. had been expecting
this invitation for Miss Montag for a long time, and that it was
confirmation of the suffering he had been made to endure that Sunday
morning from Mrs. Grubach's tenants.  He sent the maid back with the
reply that he was on his way, then he went to the wardrobe to change his
coat, and in answer to Mrs. Grubach's gentle whining about the nuisance
Miss Montag was causing merely asked her to clear away the breakfast
things.  "But you've hardly touched it," said Mrs. Grubach.  "Oh just
take it away!" shouted K.  It seemed to him that Miss Montag was mixed
up in everything and made it repulsive to him.

        As he went through the hallway he looked at the closed door of
Miss Bürstner's room.  But it wasn't there that he was invited, but the
dining room, to which he yanked the door open without knocking.

        The room was long but narrow with one window.  There was only
enough space available to put two cupboards at an angle in the corner by
the door, and the rest of the room was entirely taken up with the long
dining table which started by the door and reached all the way to the
great window, which was thus made almost inaccessible.  The table was
already laid for a large number of people, as on Sundays almost all the
tenants ate their dinner here at midday.

        When K. entered, Miss Montag came towards him from the window
along one side of the table.  They greeted each other in silence.  Then
Miss Montag, her head unusually erect as always, said, "I'm not sure
whether you know me."  K. looked at her with a frown.  "Of course I do,"
he said, "you've been living here with Mrs. Grubach for quite some time
now."  "But I get the impression you don't pay much attention to what's
going on in the lodging house,"  said Miss Montag.  "No," said K.
"Would you not like to sit down?" said Miss Montag.  In silence, the two
of them drew chairs out from the farthest end of the table and sat down
facing each other.  But Miss Montag stood straight up again as she had
left her handbag on the window sill and went to fetch it; she shuffled
down the whole length of the room.  When she came back, the handbag
lightly swinging, she said, "I'd like just to have a few words with you
on behalf of my friend.  She would have come herself, but she's feeling
a little unwell today.  Perhaps you'll be kind enough to forgive her and
listen to me instead.  There's anyway nothing that she could have said
that I won't.  On the contrary, in fact, I think I can say even more
than her because I'm relatively impartial.  Would you not agree?"  "What
is there to say, then?" answered K., who was tired of Miss Montag
continuously watching his lips.  In that way she took control of what he
wanted to say before he said it.  "Miss Bürstner clearly refuses to
grant me the personal meeting that I asked her for."  "That's how it
is," said Miss Montag, "or rather, that's not at all how it is, the way
you put it is remarkably severe.  Generally speaking, meetings are
neither granted nor the opposite.  But it can be that meetings are
considered unnecessary, and that's how it is here.  Now, after your
comment, I can speak openly.  You asked my friend, verbally or in
writing, for the chance to speak with her.  Now my friend is aware of
your reasons for asking for this meeting - or at least I suppose she is
- and so, for reasons I know nothing about, she is quite sure that it
would be of no benefit to anyone if this meeting actually took place.
Moreover, it was only yesterday, and only very briefly, that she made it
clear to me that such a meeting could be of no benefit for yourself
either, she feels that it can only have been a matter of chance that
such an idea came to you, and that even without any explanations from
her, you will very soon come to realise yourself, if you have not done
so already, the futility of your idea.  My answer to that is that
although it may be quite right, I consider it advantageous, if the
matter is to be made perfectly clear, to give you an explicit answer.  I
offered my services in taking on the task, and after some hesitation my
friend conceded.  I hope, however, also to have acted in your interests,
as even the slightest uncertainty in the least significant of matters
will always remain a cause of suffering and if, as in this case, it can
be removed without substantial effort, then it is better if that is done
without delay."  "I thank you," said K. as soon as Miss Montag had
finished.  He stood slowly up, looked at her, then across the table,
then out the window - the house opposite stood there in the sun - and
went to the door.  Miss Montag followed him a few paces, as if she did
not quite trust him.  At the door, however, both of them had to step
back as it opened and Captain Lanz entered.  This was the first time
that K. had seen him close up.  He was a large man of about forty with a
tanned, fleshy face.  He bowed slightly, intending it also for K., and
then went over to Miss Montag and deferentially kissed her hand.  He was
very elegant in the way he moved. The courtesy he showed towards Miss
Montag made a striking contrast with the way she had been treated by K.
Nonetheless, Miss Montag did not seem to be cross with K. as it even
seemed to him that she wanted to introduce the captain.  K. however, did
not want to be introduced, he would not have been able to show any sort
of friendliness either to Miss Montag or to the captain, the kiss on the
hand had, for K., bound them into a group which would keep him at a
distance from Miss Bürstner whilst at the same time seeming to be
totally harmless and unselfish.  K. thought, however, that he saw more
than that, he thought he also saw that Miss Montag had chosen a means of
doing it that was good, but two-edged.  She exaggerated the importance
of the relationship between K. and Miss Bürstner, and above all she
exaggerated the importance of asking to speak with her and she tried at
the same time to make out that K. was exaggerating everything.  She
would be disappointed, K. did not want to exaggerate anything, he was
aware that Miss Bürstner was a little typist who would not offer him
much resistance for long.  In doing so he deliberately took no account
of what Mrs. Grubach had told him about Miss Bürstner.  All these things
were going through his mind as he left the room with hardly a polite
word.  He wanted to go straight to his room, but a little laugh from
Miss Montag that he heard from the dining room behind him brought him to
the idea that he might prepare a  surprise for the two of them, the
captain and Miss Montag.  He looked round and listened to find out if
there might be any disturbance from any of the surrounding rooms,
everywhere was quiet, the only thing to be heard was the conversation
from the dining room and Mrs. Grubach's voice from the passage leading
to the kitchen.  This seemed an opportune time, K. went to Miss
Bürstner's room and knocked gently.  There was no sound so he knocked
again but there was still no answer in reply.  Was she asleep?  Or was
she really unwell?  Or was she just pretending as she realised it could
only be K. knocking so gently?  K. assumed she was pretending and
knocked harder, eventually, when the knocking brought no result, he
carefully opened the door with the sense of doing something that was not
only improper but also pointless.  In the room there was no-one.  What's
more, it looked hardly at all like the room K. had known before.
Against the wall there were now two beds behind one another, there were
clothes piled up on three chairs near the door, a wardrobe stood open.
Miss Bürstner must have gone out while Miss Montag was speaking to him
in the dining room.  K. was not greatly bothered by this, he had hardly
expected to be able to find Miss Bürstner so easily and had made this
attempt for little more reason than to spite Miss Montag.  But that made
it all the more embarrassing for him when, as he was closing the door
again, he saw Miss Montag and the captain talking in the open doorway of
the dining room.  They had probably been standing there ever since K.
had opened the door, they avoided seeming to observe K. but chatted
lightly and followed his movements with glances, the absent minded
glances to the side such as you make during a conversation.  But these
glances were heavy for K., and he rushed alongside the wall back into
his own room.




Chapter Five
The whip-man

        One evening, a few days later, K. was walking along one of the
corridors that separated his office from the main stairway - he was
nearly the last one to leave for home that evening, there remained only
a couple of workers in the light of a single bulb in the dispatch
department - when he heard a sigh from behind a door which he had
himself never opened but which he had always thought just led into a
junk room.  He stood in amazement and listened again to establish
whether he might not be mistaken.  For a while there was silence, but
then came some more sighs.  His first thought was to fetch one of the
servitors, it might well have been worth having a witness present, but
then he was taken by an uncontrollable curiosity that make him simply
yank the door open.  It was, as he had thought, a junk room.  Old,
unusable forms, empty stone ink-bottles lay scattered behind the
entrance.  But in the cupboard-like room itself stood three men,
crouching under the low ceiling.  A candle fixed on a shelf gave them
light.  "What are you doing here?" asked K. quietly, but crossly and
without thinking.  One of the men was clearly in charge, and attracted
attention by being dressed in a kind of dark leather costume which left
his neck and chest and his arms exposed.  He did not answer.  But the
other two called out, "Mr. K.!  We're to be beaten because you made a
complaint about us to the examining judge."  And now, K. finally
realised that it was actually the two policemen, Franz and Willem, and
that the third man held a cane in his hand with which to beat them.
"Well," said K., staring at them, "I didn't make any complaint, I only
said what took place in my home.  And your behaviour was not entirely
unobjectionable, after all."  "Mr. K.," said Willem, while Franz clearly
tried to shelter behind him as protection from the third man, "if you
knew how badly we get paid you wouldn't think so badly of us.  I've got
a family to feed, and Franz here wanted to get married, you just have to
get more money where you can, you can't do it just by working hard, not
however hard you try.  I was sorely tempted by your fine clothes,
policemen aren't allowed to do that sort of thing, course they aren't,
and it wasn't right of us, but it's tradition that the clothes go to the
officers, that's how it's always been, believe me; and it's
understandable too, isn't it, what can things like that mean for anyone
unlucky enough to be arrested?  But if he starts talking about it openly
then the punishment has to follow."  "I didn't know about any of this
that you've been telling me, and I made no sort of request that you be
punished, I was simply acting on principle."  "Franz," said Willem,
turning to the other policeman, "didn't I tell you that the gentleman
didn't say he wanted us to be punished?  Now you can hear for yourself,
he didn't even know we'd have to be punished."  "Don't you let them
persuade you, talking like that," said the third man to K., "this
punishment is both just and unavoidable."  "Don't listen to him," said
Willem, interrupting himself only to quickly bring his hand to his mouth
when it had received a stroke of the cane, "we're only being punished
because you made a complaint against us.  Nothing would have happened to
us otherwise, not even if they'd found out what we'd done.  Can you call
that justice?  Both of us, me especially, we'd proved our worth as good
police officers over a long period - you've got to admit yourself that
as far as official work was concerned we did the job well - things
looked good for us, we had prospects, it's quite certain that we
would've been made whip-men too, like this one, only he had the luck not
to have anyone make a complaint about him, as you really don't get many
complaints like that.  Only that's all finished now, Mr. K., our careers
are at an end, we're going to have to do work now that's far inferior to
police work and besides all this we're going to get this terrible,
painful beating."  "Can the cane really cause so much pain, then?" asked
K., testing the cane that the whip-man swang in front of him.  "We're
going to have to strip off totally naked," said Willem.  "Oh, I see,"
said K., looking straight at the whip-man, his skin was burned brown
like a sailor's, and his face showed health and vigour.  "Is there
then no possibility of sparing these two their beating?" he asked him.
"No," said the whip-man, shaking his head with a laugh.  "Get
undressed!" he ordered the policemen.  And to K. he said, "You shouldn't
believe everything they tell you, it's the fear of being beaten, it's
already made them a bit weak in the head.  This one here, for instance,"
he pointed at Willem, "all that he told you about his career prospects,
it's just ridiculous.  Look at him, look how fat he is - the first
strokes of the cane will just get lost in all that fat.   Do you know
what it is that's made him so fat?  He's in the habit of, everyone that
gets arrested by him, he eats their breakfast.  Didn't he eat up your
breakfast?  Yeah, I thought as much.  But a man with a belly like that
can't be made into a whip-man and never will be, that is quite out of
the question."  "There are whip-men like that," Willem insisted, who had
just released the belt of this trousers.  "No," said the whip-man,
striking him such a blow with the cane on his neck that it made him
wince, "you shouldn't be listening to this, just get undressed."  "I
would make it well worth your while if you would let them go," said K.,
and without looking at the whip-man again - as such matters are best
carried on with both pairs of eyes turned down - he pulled out his
wallet.  "And then you'd try and put in a complaint against me, too,"
said the whip-man, "and get me flogged.  No, no!"  "Now, do be
reasonable," said K., "if I had wanted to get these two punished I would
not now be trying to buy their freedom, would I.  I could simply close
the door here behind me, go home and see or hear nothing more of it.
But that's not what I'm doing, it really is of much more importance to
me to let them go free; if I had realised they would be punished, or
even that they might be punished, I would never have named them in the
first place as they are not the ones I hold responsible.  It's the
organisation that's to blame, the high officials are the ones to blame."
"That's how it is!" shouted the policemen, who then immediately received
another blow on their backs, which were by now exposed.  "If you had a
senior judge here beneath your stick," said K., pressing down the cane
as he spoke to stop it being raised once more, "I really would do
nothing to stop you, on the contrary, I would even pay you money to give
you all the more strength."  "Yeah, that's all very plausible, what
you're saying there," said the whip-man, "only I'm not the sort of
person you can bribe.  It's my job to flog people, so I flog them."
Franz, the policeman, had been fairly quiet so far, probably in
expectation of a good result from K.'s intervention, but now he stepped
forward to the door wearing just his trousers, kneeled down hanging on
to K.'s arm and whispered, "Even if you can't get mercy shown for both
of us, at least try and get me set free.  Willem is older than me, he's
less sensitive than me in every way, he even got a light beating a
couple of years ago, but my record's still clean, I only did things the
way I did because Willem led me on to it, he's been my teacher both for
good and bad.  Down in front of the bank my poor bride is waiting for me
at the entrance, I'm so ashamed of myself, it's pitiful."  His face was
flowing over with tears, and he wiped it dry on K.'s coat.  "I'm not
going to wait any longer," said the whip-man, taking hold of the cane in
both hands and laying in to Franz while Willem cowered back in a corner
and looked on secretly, not even daring to turn his head.  Then, the
sudden scream that shot out from Franz was long and irrevocable, it
seemed to come not from a human being but from an instrument that was
being tortured, the whole corridor rang with it, it must have been heard
by everyone in the building.  "Don't shout like that!", called out K.,
unable to prevent himself, and, as he looked anxiously in the direction
from which the servitor would come, he gave Franz a shove, not hard, but
hard enough for him to fall down unconscious, clawing at the ground with
his hands by reflex; he still did not avoid being hit; the rod still
found him on the floor; the tip of the rod swang regularly up and down
while he rolled to and fro under its blows.  And now one of the
servitors appeared in the distance, with another a few steps behind him.
K. had quickly thrown the door shut, gone over to one of the windows
overlooking the yard and opened it.  The screams had completely stopped.
So that the servitor wouldn't come in, he called out, "It's only me!"
"Good evening, chief clerk," somebody called back.  "Is there anything
wrong?"  "No, no," answered K., "it's only a dog yelping in the yard."
There was no sound from the servitors so he added, "You can go back to
what you were doing."  He did not want to become involved with a
conversation with them, and so he leant out of the window.  A little
while later, when he looked out in the corridor, they had already gone.
Now, K. remained at the window, he did not dare go back into the junk
room, and he did not want to go home either.  The yard he looked down
into was small and rectangular, all around it were offices, all the
windows were now dark and only those at the very top caught a reflection
of the moon.  K tried hard to see into the darkness of one corner of the
yard, where a few handcarts had been left behind one another. He felt
anguish at not having been able to prevent the flogging, but that was
not his fault, if Franz had not screamed like that - clearly it must
have caused a great deal of pain but it's important to maintain control
of oneself at important moments - if Franz had not screamed then it was
at least highly probable that K. would have been able to dissuade the
whip-man.  If all the junior officers were contemptible why would the
whip-man, whose position was the most inhumane of all, be any exception,
and K. had noticed very clearly how his eyes had lit up when he saw the
banknotes, he had obviously only seemed serious about the flogging to
raise the level of the bribe a little. And K. had not been ungenerous,
he really had wanted to get the policemen freed; if he really had now
begun to do something against  the degeneracy of the court then it was a
matter of course that he would have to do something here as well.  But
of course, it became impossible for him to do anything as soon as Franz
started screaming.  K. could not possibly have let the junior bank
staff, and perhaps even all sorts of other people, come along and catch
him by surprise as he haggled with those people in the junk room.
Nobody could really expect that sort of sacrifice of him.  If that had
been his intention then it would almost have been easier, K. would have
taken his own clothes off and offered himself to the whip-man in the
policemen's place.  The whip-man would certainly not have accepted this
substitution anyway, as in that way he would have seriously violated his
duty without gaining any benefit.  He would most likely have violated
his duty twice over, as court employees were probably under orders not
to cause any harm to K. while he was facing charges, although there may
have been special conditions in force here.  However things stood, K.
was able to do no more than throw the door shut, even though that would
still do nothing to remove all the dangers he faced.  It was regrettable
that he had given Franz a shove, and it could only be excused by the
heat of the moment.

        In the distance, he heard the steps of the servitors; he did not
want them to be too aware of his presence, so he closed the window and
walked towards the main staircase.  At the door of the junk room he
stopped and listened for a little while.  All was silent.  The two
policemen were entirely at the whip-man's mercy; he could have beaten
them to death.  K. reached his hand out for the door handle but drew it
suddenly back.  He was no longer in any position to help anyone, and the
servitors would soon be back;  he did, though, promise himself that he
would raise the matter again with somebody and see that, as far as it
was in his power, those who really were guilty, the high officials whom
nobody had so far dared point out to him, received their due punishment.
As he went down the main stairway at the front of the bank,  he looked
carefully round at everyone who was passing, but there was no girl to be
seen who might have been waiting for somebody, not even within some
distance from the bank.  Franz's claim that his bride was waiting for
him was thus shown to be a lie, albeit one that was forgivable and
intended only to elicit more sympathy.

        The policemen were still on K.'s mind all through the following
day; he was unable to concentrate on his work and had to stay in his
office a little longer than the previous day so that he could finish it.
On the way home, as he passed by the junk room again, he opened its door
as if that had been his habit.  Instead of the darkness he expected, he
saw everything unchanged from the previous evening, and did not know how
he should respond.  Everything was exactly the same as he had seen it
when he had opened the door the previous evening.   The forms and
bottles of ink just inside the doorway, the whip-man with his cane, the
two policemen, still undressed, the candle on the shelf, and the two
policemen began to wail and call out "Mr. K.!"  K. slammed the door
immediately shut, and even thumped on it with his fists as if that would
shut it all the firmer.  Almost in tears, he ran to the servitors
working quietly at the copying machine.  "Go and get that junk room
cleared out!" he shouted, and, in amazement, they stopped what they were
doing. "It should have been done long ago, we're sinking in dirt!"  They
would be able to do the job the next day, K. nodded, it was too late in
the evening to make them do it there and then as he had originally
intended.  He sat down briefly in order to keep them near him for a
little longer, looked through a few of the copies to give the impression
that he was checking them and then, as he saw that they would not dare
to leave at the same time as himself, went home tired and with his mind
numb.




Chapter Six
K.'s uncle - Leni

        One afternoon - K. was very busy at the time, getting the post
ready - K.'s Uncle Karl, a small country land owner, came into the room,
pushing his way between two of the staff who were bringing in some
papers.   K. had long expected his uncle to appear, but the sight of him
now shocked K. far less than the prospect of it had done a long time
before.  His uncle was bound to come, K. had been sure of that for about
a month.  He already thought at the time he could see how his uncle
would arrive, slightly bowed, his battered panama hat in his left hand,
his right hand already stretched out over the desk long before he was
close enough as he rushed carelessly towards K. knocking over everything
that was in his way.  K.'s uncle was always in a hurry, as he suffered
from the unfortunate belief that he had a number of things to do while he
was in the big city and had to settle all of them in one day - his
visits were only ever for one day - and at the same time thought he
could not forgo any conversation or piece of business or pleasure that
might arise by chance.  Uncle Karl was K.'s former guardian, and so K.
was duty-bound to help him in all of this as well as to offer him a bed
for the night.  'I'm haunted by a ghost from the country', he would say.

        As soon as they had greeted each other - K. had invited him to sit
in the armchair but Uncle Karl had no time for that - he said he wanted
to speak briefly with K. in private.  "It is necessary," he said with a
tired gulp, "it is necessary for my peace of mind."   K. immediately
sent the junior staff from the room and told them to let no-one in.
"What's this that I've been hearing, Josef?" cried K.'s uncle when they
were alone, as he sat on the table shoving various papers under himself
without looking at them to make himself more comfortable.  K. said
nothing, he knew what was coming, but, suddenly relieved from the effort
of the work he had been doing, he gave way to a pleasant lassitude and
looked out the window at the other side of the street.  From where he
sat, he could see just a small, triangular section of it, part of the
empty walls of houses between two shop windows.  "You're staring out the
window!" called out his uncle, raising his arms, "For God's sake, Josef,
give me an answer!  Is it true, can it really be true?"  "Uncle Karl,"
said K., wrenching himself back from his daydreaming, "I really don't
know what it is you want of me."  "Josef," said his uncle in a warning
tone, "as far as I know, you've always told the truth.  Am I to take
what you've just said as a bad sign?"  "I think I know what it is you
want," said K. obediently, "I expect you've heard about my trial."
"That's right," answered his uncle with a slow nod, "I've heard about
your trial."  "Who did you hear it from, then?" asked K.  "Erna wrote to
me," said his uncle, "she doesn't have much contact with you, it's true,
you don't pay very much attention to her, I'm afraid to say, but she
learned about it nonetheless.  I got her letter today and, of course, I
came straight here.  And for no other reason, but it seems to me that
this is reason enough.  I can read you out the part of the letter that
concerns you."  He drew the letter out from his wallet.  "Here it is.
She writes; 'I have not seen Josef for a long time, I was in the bank
last week but Josef was so busy that they would not let me through; I
waited there for nearly an hour but then I had to go home as I had my
piano lesson.  I would have liked to have spoken to him, maybe there
will be a chance another time.  He sent me a big box of chocolates for
my name-day, that was very nice and attentive of him.  I forgot to tell
you about it when I wrote, and I only remember now that you ask me about
it.  Chocolate, as I am sure you are aware, disappears straight away in
this lodging house, almost as soon as you know somebody has given you
chocolate it is gone.  But there is something else I wanted to tell you
about Josef.  Like I said, they would not let me through to see him at
the bank because he was negotiating with some gentleman just then.
After I had been waiting quietly for quite a long time I asked one of
the staff whether his meeting would last much longer.  He said it might
well do, as it was probably about the legal proceedings, he said, that
were being conducted against him.   I asked what sort of legal
proceedings it was that were being conducted against the chief clerk,
and whether he was not making some mistake, but he said he was not
making any mistake, there were legal proceedings underway and even that
they were about something quite serious, but he did not know any more
about it.   He would have liked to have been of some help to the chief
clerk himself, as the chief clerk was a gentleman, good and honest, but
he did not know what it was he could do and merely hoped there would be
some influential gentlemen who would take his side.  I'm sure that is
what will happen and that everything will turn out for the best in the
end, but in the mean time things do not look at all good, and you can
see that from the mood of the chief clerk himself.  Of course, I did not
place too much importance on this conversation, and even did my best to
put the bank clerk's mind at rest, he was quite a simple man.  I told
him he was not to speak to anyone else about this, and I think it is all
just a rumour, but I still think it might be good if you, Dear Father,
if you looked into the matter the next time you visit.   It will be easy
for you to find out more detail and, if it is really necessary, to do
something about it through the great and influential people you know.
But if it is not necessary, and that is what seems most likely, then at
least your daughter will soon have the chance to embrace you and I look
forward to it.' - She's a good child," said K.'s uncle when he had
finished reading, and wiped a few tears from his eyes.  K. nodded.  With
all the different disruptions he had had recently he had completely
forgotten about Erna, even her birthday, and the story of the chocolates
had clearly just been invented so that he wouldn't get in trouble with
his aunt and uncle.  It was very touching, and even the theatre tickets,
which he would regularly send her from then on, would not be enough to
repay her,  but he really did not feel, now, that it was right for him
to visit her in her lodgings and hold conversations with a little,
eighteen year old schoolgirl.  "And what do you have to say about that?"
asked his uncle, who had forgotten all his rush and excitement as he read
the letter, and seemed to be about to read it again.  "Yes, Uncle," said
K., "it is true."  "True!" called out his uncle. "What is true?  How can
this be true?  What sort of trial is it?  Not a criminal trial, I hope?"
"It's a criminal trial," answered K.  "And you sit quietly here while
you've got a criminal trial round your neck?" shouted his uncle, getting
ever louder.  "The more calm I am, the better it will be for the
outcome," said K. in a tired voice, "don't worry."  "How can I help
worrying?!" shouted his uncle, "Josef, my Dear Josef, think about
yourself, about your family, think about our good name!  Up till now,
you've always been our pride, don't now become our disgrace.  I don't
like the way you're behaving," he said, looking at K. with his head at
an angle, "that's not how an innocent man behaves when he's accused of
something, not if he's still got any strength in him.  Just tell me what
it's all about so that I can help you.  It's something to do with the
bank, I take it?"  "No," said K. as he stood up, "and you're speaking
too loud, Uncle, I expect one of the staff is listening at the door and
I find that rather unpleasant.  It's best if we go somewhere else, then
I can answer all your questions, as far as I can.  And I know very well
that I have to account to the family for what I do."  "You certainly
do!" his uncle shouted, "Quite right, you do.  Now just get a move on,
Josef, hurry up now!"  "I still have a few documents I need to prepare,"
said K., and, using the intercom, he summoned his deputy who entered a
few moments later.  K.'s uncle, still angry and excited, gestured with
his hand to show that K. had summoned him, even though there was no need
whatever to do so.  K. stood in front of the desk and explained to the
young man, who listened calm and attentive, what would need to be done
that day in his absence, speaking in a calm voice and making use of
various documents.   The presence of K.'s uncle while this was going on
was quite disturbing; he did not listen to what was being said,  but at
first he stood there with eyes wide open and nervously biting his lips.
Then he began to walk up and down the room, stopped now and then at the
window, or stood in front of a picture always making various
exclamations such as, "That is totally incomprehensible to me!" or "Now
just tell me, what are you supposed to make of that?!"  The young man
pretended to notice nothing of this and listened to K.'s instructions
through to the end, he made a few notes, bowed to both K. and his uncle
and then left the room.  K.'s uncle had turned his back to him and was
looking out the window, bunching up the curtains with his outstretched
hands.  The door had hardly closed when he called out, "At last!  Now
that he's stopped jumping about we can go too!"  Once they were in the
front hall of the bank, where several members of staff were standing
about and where, just then, the deputy director was walking across,
there was unfortunately no way of stopping K.'s uncle from continually
asking questions about the trial.  "Now then, Josef," he began, lightly
acknowledging the bows from those around them as they passed, "tell me
everything about this trial; what sort of trial is it?"  K. made a few
comments which conveyed little information, even laughed a little, and
it  was only when they reached the front steps that he explained to his
uncle that he had not wanted to talk openly in front of those people.
"Quite right," said his uncle, "but now start talking."  With his head
to one side, and smoking his cigar in short, impatient draughts, he
listened.  "First of all, Uncle," said K., "it's not a trial like you'd
have in a normal courtroom."  "So much the worse," said his uncle.
"How's that?" asked K., looking at him.  "What I mean is, that's for the
worse," he repeated.  They were standing on the front steps of the bank;
as the doorkeeper seemed to be listening to what they were saying K.
drew his uncle down further, where they were absorbed into the bustle of
the street.  His uncle took K.'s arm and stopped asking questions with
such urgency about the trial, they walked on for a while in silence.
"But how did all this come about?" he eventually asked, stopping
abruptly enough to startle the people walking behind, who had to avoid
walking into him.  "Things like this don't come all of a sudden, they
start developing a long time beforehand, there must have been warning
signs of it, why didn't you write to me?  You know I'd do anything for
you, to some extent I am still your guardian, and until today that's
something I was proud of.  I'll still help you, of course I will, only
now, now that the trial is already underway, it makes it very difficult.
But whatever; the best thing now is for you to take a short holiday
staying with us in the country.  You've lost weight, I can see that now.
The country life will give you strength, that will be good, there's
bound to be a lot of hard work ahead of you.  But besides that it'll be
a way of getting you away from the court, to some extent.  Here they've
got every means of showing the powers at their disposal and they're
automatically bound to use them against you; in the country they'll
either have to delegate authority to different bodies or just have to
try and bother you by letter, telegram or telephone.  And that's bound
to weaken the effect, it won't release you from them but it'll give you
room to breathe."  "You could forbid me to leave," said K., who had been
drawn slightly into his uncle's way of thinking by what he had been
saying.  "I didn't think you would do it," said his uncle thoughtfully,
"you won't suffer too much loss of power by moving away."  K. grasped
his uncle under the arm to prevent him stopping still and said, "I
thought you'd think all this is less important than I do, and now you're
taking it so hard."  "Josef," called his uncle trying to disentangle
himself from him so that he could stop walking, but K. did not let go,
"you've completely changed, you used to be so astute, are you losing it
now?  Do you want to lose the trial?  Do you realise what that would
mean?  That would mean you would be simply destroyed.  And that everyone
you know would be pulled down with you or at the very least humiliated,
disgraced right down to the ground.  Josef, pull yourself together.  The
way you're so indifferent about it, it's driving me mad.  Looking at you
I can almost believe that old saying: 'Having a trial like that means
losing a trial like that'."  "My dear Uncle," said K., "it won't do any
good to get excited, it's no good for you to do it and it'd be no good
for me to do it.  The case won't be won by getting excited, and please
admit that my practical experience counts for something, just as I have
always and still do respect your experience, even when it surprises me.
You say that the family will also be affected by this trial; I really
can't see how, but that's beside the point and I'm quite willing to
follow your instructions in all of this.  Only, I don't see any
advantage in staying in the country, not even for you, as that would
indicate flight and a sense of guilt.  And besides, although I am more
subject to persecution if I stay in the city I can also press the matter
forward better here."  "You're right," said his uncle in a tone that
seemed to indicate they were finally coming closer to each other, "I
just made the suggestion because, as I saw it, if you stay in the city
the case will be put in danger by your indifference to it, and I thought
it was better if I did the work for you.  But will you push things
forward yourself with all your strength, if so, that will naturally be
far better."  "We're agreed then," said K.  "And do you have any
suggestions for what I should do next?"  "Well, naturally I'll have to
think about it," said his uncle, "you must bear in mind that I've been
living in the country for twenty years now, almost without a break, you
lose your ability to deal with matters like this.  But I do have some
important connections with several people who, I expect, know their way
around these things better than I do, and to contact them is a matter of
course.  Out there in the country I've been getting out of condition,
I'm sure you're already aware of that.  It's only at times like this
that you notice it yourself.  And this affair of yours came largely
unexpected, although, oddly enough, I had expected something of the sort
after I'd read Erna's letter, and today when I saw your face I knew it
with almost total certainty.  But all that is by the by, the important
thing now is, we have no time to lose."  Even while he was still
speaking, K.'s uncle had stood on tiptoe to summon a taxi and now he
pulled K. into the car behind himself as he called out an address to the
driver.  "We're going now to see Dr. Huld, the lawyer," he said, "we
were at school together.  I'm sure you know the name, don't you?  No?
Well that is odd.  He's got a very good reputation as a defence
barrister and for working with the poor.  But I esteem him especially as
someone you can trust."  "It's alright with me, whatever you do," said
K., although he was made uneasy by the rushed and urgent way his uncle
was dealing with the matter.  It was not very encouraging, as the
accused, be to taken to a lawyer for poor people.  "I didn't know," he
said, "that you could take on a lawyer in matters like this."  "Well of
course you can," said his uncle, "that goes without saying.  Why
wouldn't you take on a lawyer?  And now, so that I'm properly instructed
in this matter, tell me what's been happening so far."  K. instantly
began telling his uncle about what had been happening, holding nothing
back - being completely open with him was the only way that K. could
protest at his uncle's belief that the trial was a great disgrace.  He
mentioned Miss Bürstner's name just once and in passing, but that did
nothing to diminish his openness about the trial as Miss Bürstner had no
connection with it.  As he spoke, he looked out the window and saw how,
just then, they were getting closer to the suburb where the court
offices were.  He drew this to his uncle's attention, but he did not
find the coincidence especially remarkable.  The taxi stopped in front
of a dark building.  K.'s uncle knocked at the very first door at ground
level; while they waited he smiled, showing his big teeth, and
whispered, "Eight o'clock; not the usual sort of time to be visiting a
lawyer, but Huld won't mind it from me."  Two large, black eyes appeared
in the spy-hatch in the door, they stared at the two visitors for a
while and then disappeared; the door, however, did not open.  K. and his
uncle confirmed to each other the fact that they had seen the two eyes.
"A new maid, afraid of strangers," said K.'s uncle, and knocked again.
The eyes appeared once more.  This time they seemed almost sad, but the
open gas flame that burned with a hiss close above their heads gave off
little light and that may have merely created an illusion.  "Open the
door," called K.'s uncle, raising his fist against it, "we are friends
of Dr. Huld, the lawyer!"  "Dr. Huld is ill," whispered someone behind
them.  In a doorway at the far end of a narrow passage stood a man in
his dressing gown, giving them this information in an extremely quiet
voice.  K.'s uncle, who had already been made very angry by the long
wait, turned abruptly round and retorted, "Ill?  You say he's ill?" and
strode towards the gentleman in a way that seemed almost threatening, as
if he were the illness himself.  "They've opened the door for you, now,"
said the gentleman, pointing at the door of the lawyer.  He pulled his
dressing gown together and disappeared.  The door had indeed been
opened, a young girl - K. recognised the dark, slightly bulging eyes -
stood in the hallway in a long white apron, holding a candle in her
hand.  "Next time, open up sooner!" said K.'s uncle instead of a
greeting, while the girl made a slight curtsey. "Come along, Josef," he
then said to K. who was slowly moving over towards the girl. "Dr. Huld
is unwell," said the girl as K.'s uncle, without stopping, rushed
towards one of the doors.  K. continued to look at the girl in amazement
as she turned round to block the way into the living room, she had a
round face like a puppy's, not only the pale cheeks and the chin were
round but the temples and the hairline were too.  "Josef!" called his
uncle once more, and he asked the girl, "It's trouble with his heart, is
it?"  "I think it is, sir," said the girl, who by now had found time to
go ahead with the candle and open the door into the room. In one corner
of the room, where the light of the candle did not reach, a face with a
long beard looked up from the bed.  "Leni, who's this coming in?" asked
the lawyer, unable to recognise his guests because he was dazzled by the
candle.  "It's your old friend, Albert," said K.'s uncle.  "Oh, Albert,"
said the lawyer, falling back onto his pillow as if this visit meant he
would not need to keep up appearances.  "Is it really as bad as that?"
asked K.'s uncle, sitting on the edge of the bed.  "I don't believe it
is.  It's a recurrence of your heart trouble and it'll pass over like
the other times."  "Maybe," said the lawyer quietly, "but it's just as
much trouble as it's ever been.  I can hardly breathe, I can't sleep at
all and I'm getting weaker by the day."  "I see," said K.'s uncle,
pressing his panama hat firmly against his knee with his big hand.
"That is bad news.  But are you getting the right sort of care?  And
it's so depressing in here, it's so dark.  It's a long time since I was
last here, but it seemed to me friendlier then.  Even your young lady
here doesn't seem to have much life in her, unless she's just
pretending."  The maid was still standing by the door with the candle;
as far as could be made out, she was watching K. more than she was
watching his uncle even while the latter was still speaking about her.
K. leant against a chair that he had pushed near to the girl.  "When
you're as ill as I am," said the lawyer, "you need to have peace.  I
don't find it depressing."  After a short pause he added, "and Leni
looks after me well, she's a good girl."  But that was not enough to
persuade K.'s uncle, he had visibly taken against his friend's carer
and, even though he did not contradict the invalid, he persecuted her
with his scowl as she went over to the bed, put the candle on the
bedside table and, leaning over the bed, made a fuss of him by tidying
the pillows.  K.'s uncle nearly forgot the need to show any
consideration for the man who lay ill in bed, he stood up, walked up and
down behind the carer, and K. would not have been surprised if he had
grabbed hold of her skirts behind her and dragged her away from the bed.
K. himself looked on calmly, he was not even disappointed at finding the
lawyer unwell, he had been able to do nothing to oppose the enthusiasm
his uncle had developed for the matter, he was glad that this enthusiasm
had now been distracted without his having to do anything about it.  His
uncle, probably simply wishing to be offensive to the lawyer's
attendant, then said, "Young lady, now please leave us alone for a
while, I have some personal matters to discuss with my friend."  Dr.
Huld's carer was still leant far over the invalid's bed and smoothing
out the cloth covering the wall next to it, she merely turned her head
and then, in striking contrast with the anger that first stopped K.'s
uncle from speaking and then let the words out in a gush, she said very
quietly, "You can see that Dr. Huld is so ill that he can't discuss any
matters at all."  It was probably just for the sake of convenience that
she had repeated the words spoken by K.'s uncle, but an onlooker might
even have perceived it as mocking him and he, of course, jumped up as if
he had just been stabbed.  "You damned ...," in the first gurglings of
his excitement his words could hardly be understood, K. was startled
even though he had been expecting something of the sort and ran to his
uncle with the intention, no doubt, of closing his mouth with both his
hands.  Fortunately, though, behind the girl, the invalid raised himself
up, K.'s uncle made an ugly face as if swallowing something disgusting
and then, somewhat calmer, said, "We have naturally not lost our senses,
not yet; if what I am asking for were not possible I would not be asking
for it.  Now please, go!"  The carer stood up straight by the bed
directly facing K.'s uncle, K. thought he noticed that with one hand she
was stroking the lawyer's hand.  "You can say anything in front of
Leni," said the invalid, in a tone that was unmistakably imploring.
"It's not my business," said K.'s uncle, "and it's not my secrets."  And
he twisted himself round as if wanting to go into no more negotiations
but giving himself a little more time to think. "Whose business is it
then?" asked the lawyer in an exhausted voice as he leant back again.
"My nephew's," said K.'s uncle, "and I've brought him along with me."
And he introduced him, "Chief Clerk Josef K."  "Oh!" said the invalid,
now with much more life in him, and reached out his hand towards K.  "Do
forgive me, I didn't notice you there at all."  Then he then said to his
carer, "Leni, go," stretching his hand out to her as if this were a
farewell that would have to last for a long time.  This time the girl
offered no resistance.  "So you," he finally said to K.'s uncle, who had
also calmed down and stepped closer, "you haven't come to visit me
because I'm ill but you've come on business."  The lawyer now looked so
much stronger that it seemed the idea of being visited because he was
ill had somehow made him weak, he remained supporting himself of one
elbow, which must have been rather tiring, and continually pulled at a
lock of hair in the middle of his beard.  "You already look much
better," said K.'s uncle, "now that that witch has gone outside." He
interrupted himself, whispered, "I bet you she's listening!" and sprang
over to the door.  But behind the door there was no-one, K.'s uncle came
back not disappointed, as her not listening seemed to him worse than if
she had been, but probably somewhat embittered.  "You're mistaken about
her," said the lawyer, but did nothing more to defend her; perhaps that
was his way of indicating that she did not need defending.  But in a
tone that was much more committed he went on, "As far as your nephew's
affairs are concerned, this will be an extremely difficult undertaking
and I'd count myself lucky if my strength lasted out long enough for it;
I'm greatly afraid it won't do, but anyway I don't want to leave
anything untried; if I don't last out you can always get somebody else.
To be honest, this matter interests me too much, and I can't bring
myself to give up the chance of taking some part in it.  If my heart
does totally give out then at least it will have found a worthy affair
to fail in."  K. believed he understood not a word of this entire
speech, he looked at his uncle for an explanation but his uncle sat on
the bedside table with the candle in his hand, a medicine bottle had
rolled off the table onto the floor, he nodded to everything the lawyer
said, agreed to everything, and now and then looked at K. urging him to
show the same compliance.  Maybe K.'s uncle had already told the lawyer
about the trial.  But that was impossible, everything that had happened
so far spoke against it.  So he said,
"I don't understand ..."  "Well, maybe I've misunderstood what you've
been saying," said the lawyer, just as astonished and embarrassed as K.
"Perhaps I've been going too fast.  What was it you wanted to speak to
me about?  I thought it was to do with your trial."  "Of course it is,"
said K.'s uncle, who then asked K., "So what is it you want?"  "Yes, but
how is it that you know anything about me and my case?" asked K.  "Oh, I
see," said the lawyer with a smile.  "I am a lawyer, I move in court
circles, people talk about various different cases and the more
interesting ones stay in your mind, especially when they concern the
nephew of a friend.  There's nothing very remarkable about that."  "What
is it you want, then?" asked K.'s uncle once more, "You seem so uneasy
about it"  "You move in this court's circles?" asked K.  "Yes," said the
lawyer.  "You're asking questions like a child," said K.'s uncle.  "What
circles should I move in, then, if not with members of my own
discipline?" the lawyer added.  It sounded so indisputable that K. gave
no answer at all.  "But you work in the High Court, not that court in
the attic," he had wanted to say but could not bring himself to actually
utter it.  "You have to realise," the lawyer continued, in a tone as if
he were explaining something obvious, unnecessary and incidental,  "you
have to realise that I also derive great advantage for my clients from
mixing with those people, and do so in many different ways, it's not
something you can keep talking about all the time.  I'm at a bit of a
disadvantage now, of course, because of my illness, but I still get
visits from some good friends of mine at the court and I learn one or
two things.  It might even be that I learn more than many of those who
are in the best of health and spend all day in court.  And I'm receiving
a very welcome visit right now, for instance."  And he pointed into a
dark corner of the room.  "Where?" asked K., almost uncouth in his
surprise.  He looked round uneasily; the little candle gave off far too
little light to reach as far as the wall opposite.  And then, something
did indeed begin to move there in the corner.  In the light of the
candle held up by K.'s uncle an elderly gentleman could be seen sitting
beside a small table.  He had been sitting there for so long without
being noticed that he could hardly have been breathing.  Now he stood up
with a great deal of fuss, clearly unhappy that attention had been drawn
to him.  It was as if, by flapping his hands about like short wings, he
hoped to deflect any introductions and greetings, as if he wanted on no
account to disturb the others by his presence and seemed to be exhorting
them to leave him back in the dark and forget about his being there.
That, however, was something that could no longer be granted him.  "You
took us by surprise, you see," said the lawyer in explanation,
cheerfully indicating to the gentleman that he should come closer,
which, slowly, hesitatingly, looking all around him, but with a certain
dignity, he did.  "The office director - oh, yes, forgive me, I haven't
introduced you - this is my friend Albert K., this is his nephew, the
chief clerk Josef K., and this is the office director - so, the office
director was kind enough to pay me a visit.  It's only possible to
appreciate just how valuable a visit like this is if you've been let
into the secret of what a pile of work the office director has heaped
over him.  Well, he came anyway, we were having a peaceful chat, as far
as I was able when I'm so weak, and although we hadn't told Leni she
mustn't let anyone in as we weren't expecting anyone, we still would
rather have remained alone, but then along came you, Albert, thumping
your fists on the door, the office director moved over into the corner
pulling his table and chair with him, but now it turns out we might
have, that is, if that's what you wish, we might have something to
discuss with each other and it would be good if we can all come back
together again.  - Office director  ...," he said with his head on one
side, pointing with a humble smile to an armchair near the bed.  "I'm
afraid I'll only be able to stay a few minutes more," smiled the office
director as he spread himself out in the armchair and looked at the
clock.  "Business calls.  But I wouldn't want to miss the chance of
meeting a friend of my friend."  He inclined his head slightly toward
K.'s uncle, who seemed very happy with his new acquaintance, but he was
not the sort of person to express his feelings of deference and
responded to the office director's words with embarrassed, but loud,
laughter.  A horrible sight!  K. was able to quietly watch everything as
nobody paid any attention to him, the office director took over as
leader of the conversation as seemed to be his habit once he had been
called forward, the lawyer listened attentively with his hand to his
ear, his initial weakness having perhaps only had the function of
driving away his new visitors, K.'s uncle served as candle-bearer -
balancing the candle on his thigh while the office director frequently
glanced nervously at it - and was soon free of his embarrassment and was
quickly enchanted not only by the office director's speaking manner but
also by the gentle, waving hand-movements with which he accompanied it.
K., leaning against the bedpost, was totally ignored by the office
director, perhaps deliberately, and served the old man only as audience.
And besides, he had hardly any idea what the conversation was about and
his thoughts soon turned to the care assistant and the ill treatment she
had suffered from his uncle.  Soon after, he began to wonder whether he
had not seen the office director somewhere before, perhaps among the
people who were at his first hearing.  He may have been mistaken, but
thought the office director might well have been among the old gentlemen
with the thin beards in the first row.

        There was then a noise that everyone heard from the hallway as if
something of porcelain were being broken.  "I'll go and see what's
happened," said K., who slowly left the room as if giving the others the
chance to stop him.  He had hardly stepped into the hallway, finding his
bearings in the darkness with his hand still firmly holding the door,
when another small hand, much smaller than K.'s own, placed itself on
his and gently shut the door.  It was the carer who had been waiting
there.  "Nothing has happened," she whispered to him, "I just threw a
plate against the wall to get you out of there."   "I was thinking about
you, as well," replied K. uneasily.  "So much the better," said the
carer.  "Come with me".  A few steps along, they came to a frosted glass
door which the carer opened for him.  "Come in here," she said.  It was
clearly the lawyer's office, fitted out with old, heavy furniture, as
far as could be seen in the moonlight which now illuminated just a
small, rectangular section of the floor by each of the three big
windows.  "This way," said the carer, pointing to a dark trunk with a
carved, wooden backrest.  When he had sat down, K. continued to look
round the room, it was a large room with a high ceiling, the clients of
this lawyer for the poor must have felt quite lost in it.  K. thought he
could see the little steps with which visitors would approach the
massive desk.  But then he forgot about all of this and had eyes only
for the carer who sat very close beside him, almost pressing him against
the armrest.  "I did think," she said "you would come out here to me by
yourself without me having to call you first.  It was odd.  First you stare
at me as soon as you come in, and then you keep me waiting.  And you
ought to call me Leni, too," she added quickly and suddenly, as if no
moment of this conversation should be lost.  "Gladly," said K.  "But as
for its being odd, Leni, that's easy to explain.  Firstly, I had to
listen to what the old men were saying and couldn't leave without a good
reason, but secondly I'm not a bold  person, if anything I'm quite shy,
and you, Leni, you didn't really look like you could be won over in one
stroke, either."  "That's not it," said Leni, laying one arm on the
armrest and looking at K., "you didn't like me, and I don't suppose you
like me now, either."  "Liking wouldn't be very much," said K.,
evasively.  "Oh!" she exclaimed with a smile, thus making use of  K.'s
comment to gain an advantage over him.  So K. remained silent for a
while.  By now, he had become used to the darkness in the room and was
able to make out various fixtures and fittings.  He was especially
impressed by a large picture hanging to the right of the door, he leant
forward in order to see it better.  It depicted a man wearing a judge's
robes; he was sitting on a lofty throne gilded in a way that shone forth
from the picture.  The odd thing about the picture was that this judge
was not sitting there in dignified calm but had his left arm pressed
against the back and armrest, his right arm, however, was completely
free and only grasped the armrest with his hand, as if about to jump up
any moment in vigorous outrage and make some decisive comment or even to
pass sentence.  The accused was probably meant to be imagined at the
foot of the steps, the top one of which could be seen in the picture,
covered with a yellow carpet.  "That might be my judge," said K.,
pointing to the picture with one finger.  "I know him," said Leni
looking up at the picture, "he comes here quite often.  That picture is
from when he was young, but he can never have looked anything like it,
as he's tiny, minute almost.  But despite that, he had himself made to
look bigger in the picture as he's madly vain, just like everyone round
here.  But even I'm vain and that makes me very unhappy that you don't
like me."  K. replied to that last comment merely by embracing Leni and
drawing her towards him, she lay her head quietly on his shoulder.  To
the rest of it, though, he said, "What rank is he?"  "He's an examining
judge," she said, taking hold of the hand with which K. held her and
playing with his fingers.  "Just an examining judge once again," said K.
in disappointment, "the senior officials keep themselves hidden.  But
here he is sitting on a throne."  "That's all just made up," said Leni
with her face bent over K.'s hand, "really he's sitting on a kitchen
chair with an old horse blanket folded over it.  But do you have to be
always thinking about your trial?" she added slowly.  "No, not at all,"
said K., "I probably even think too little about it."  "That's not the
mistake you're making," said Leni, "you're too unyielding, that's what
I've heard."  "Who said that?" asked K., he felt her body against his
chest and looked down on her rich, dark, tightly-bound hair.  "I'd be
saying too much if I told you that," answered Leni.  "Please don't ask
for names, but do stop making these mistakes of yours, stop being so
unyielding, there's nothing you can do to defend yourself from this
court, you have to confess.  So confess to them as soon as you get the
chance.  It's only then that they give you the chance to get away, not
till then.  Only, without help from outside even that's impossible, but
you needn't worry about getting this help as I want to help you myself."
"You understand a lot about this court and what sort of tricks are
needed," said K. as he lifted her, since she was pressing in much too
close to him, onto his lap.  "That's alright, then," she said, and made
herself comfortable on his lap by smoothing out her skirt and adjusting
her blouse.  Then she hung both her arms around his neck, leant back and
took a long look at him.  "And what if I don't confess, could you not
help me then?" asked K. to test her out.  I'm accumulating women to help
me, he thought to himself almost in amazement, first Miss Bürstner, then
the court usher's wife, and now this little care assistant who seems to
have some incomprehensible need for me.  The way she sits on my lap as
if it were her proper place!  "No," answered Leni, slowly shaking her
head, "I couldn't help you then.  But you don't want my help anyway, it
means nothing to you, you're too stubborn and won't be persuaded."
Then, after a while she asked, "Do you have a lover?"  "No," said K.
"Oh, you must have," she said.  "Well, I have really," said K.  "Just
think, I've even betrayed her while I'm carrying her photograph with
me."  Leni insisted he show her a photograph of Elsa, and then, hunched
on his lap, studied the picture closely.  The photograph was not one
that had been taken while Elsa was posing for it, it showed her just
after she had been in a wild dance such as she liked to do in wine bars,
her skirt was still flung out as she span round, she had placed her
hands on her firm hips and, with her neck held taut, looked to one side
with a laugh; you could not see from the picture whom her laugh was
intended for.  "She's very tightly laced," said Leni, pointing to the
place where she thought this could be seen.  "I don't like her, she's
clumsy and crude.  But maybe she's gentle and friendly towards you,
that's the impression you get from the picture.  Big, strong girls like
that often don't know how to be anything but gentle and friendly.  Would
she be capable of sacrificing herself for you, though?"  "No," said K.,
"she isn't gentle or friendly, and nor would she be capable of
sacrificing herself for me.  But I've never yet asked any of those
things of her.  I've never looked at this picture as closely as you."
"You can't think much of her, then," said Leni. "She can't be your lover
after all."  "Yes she is," said K., "I'm not going to take my word back
on that."  "Well she might be your lover now, then," said Leni, "but you
wouldn't miss her much if you lost her or if you exchanged her for
somebody else, me for instance."  "That is certainly conceivable," said
K. with a smile, "but she does have one major advantage over you, she
knows nothing about my trial, and even if she did she wouldn't think
about it.  She wouldn't try to persuade me to be less unyielding."  "Well
that's no advantage," said Leni.  "If she's got no advantage other than
that, I can keep on hoping.  Has she got any bodily defects?"  "'Bodily
defects'?" asked K.  "Yeah," said Leni, "as I do have a bodily defect,
just a little one.  Look."  She spread the middle and ring fingers of
her right hand apart from each other.  Between those fingers the flap of
skin connecting them reached up almost as far as the top joint of the
little finger.  In the darkness, K. did not see at first what it was she
wanted to show him, so she led his hand to it so that he could feel.
"What a freak of nature," said K., and when he had taken a look at the
whole hand he added, "What a pretty claw!"  Leni looked on with a kind
of pride as K. repeatedly opened and closed her two fingers in
amazement, until, finally, he briefly kissed them and let go.  "Oh!" she
immediately exclaimed, "you kissed me!"  Hurriedly, and with her mouth
open, she clambered up K.'s lap with her knees.  He was almost aghast as
he looked up at her, now that she was so close to him there was a
bitter, irritating smell from her, like pepper, she grasped his head,
leant out over him, and bit and kissed his neck, even biting into his
hair.  "I've taken her place!" she exclaimed from time to time.  "Just
look, now you've taken me instead of her!"   Just then, her knee slipped
out and, with a little cry, she nearly fell down onto the carpet, K.
tried to hold her by putting his arms around her and was pulled down
with her.  "Now you're mine," she said.  Her last words to him as he
left were, "Here's the key to the door, come whenever you want", and she
planted an undirected kiss on his back.  When he stepped out the front
door there was a light rain falling, he was about to go to the middle of
the street to see if he could still glimpse Leni at the window when K.'s
uncle leapt out of a car that K., thinking of other things, had not seen
waiting outside the building.  He took hold of K. by both arms and
shoved him against the door as if he wanted to nail him to it.  "Young
man," he shouted, "how could you do a thing like that?!  Things were
going well with this business of yours, now you've caused it terrible
damage.  You slip off with some dirty, little thing who, moreover, is
obviously the lawyer's beloved, and stay away for hours.  You don't even
try to find an excuse, don't try to hide anything, no, you're quite open
about it, you run off with her and stay there.  And meanwhile we're
sitting there, your uncle who's going to such effort for you, the lawyer
who needs to be won over to your side, and above all the office
director, a very important gentleman who is in direct command of your
affair in its present stage.  We wanted to discuss how best to help you,
I had to handle the lawyer very carefully, he had to handle the office
director carefully, and you had most reason of all to at least give me
some support.  Instead of which you stay away.  Eventually we couldn't
keep up the pretence any longer, but these are polite and highly capable
men, they didn't say anything about it so as to spare my feelings but in
the end not even they could continue to force themselves and, as they
couldn't speak about the matter in hand, they became silent.  We sat
there for several minutes, listening to see whether you wouldn't finally
come back.  All in vain.  In the end the office director stood up, as he
had stayed far longer than he had originally intended, made his
farewell, looked at me in sympathy without being able to help, he waited
at the door for a long time although it's more than I can understand why
he was being so good, and then he went.  I, of course, was glad he'd
gone, I'd been holding my breath all this time.  All this had even more
affect on the lawyer lying there ill, when I took my leave of him, the
good man, he was quite unable to speak.  You have probably contributed
to his total collapse and so brought the very man who you are dependent
on closer to his death.  And me, your own uncle, you leave me here in
the rain - just feel this, I'm wet right through - waiting here for
hours, sick with worry."




Chapter Seven
Lawyer - Manufacturer - Painter

        One winter morning - snow was falling in the dull light outside -
K. was sitting in his office, already extremely tired despite the early
hour.  He had told the servitor he was engaged in a major piece of work
and none of the junior staff should be allowed in to see him, so he
would not be disturbed by them at least.  But instead of working he
turned round in his chair, slowly moved various items around his desk,
but then, without being aware of it, he lay his arm stretched out on the
desk top and sat there immobile with his head sunk down on his chest.

        He was no longer able to get the thought of the trial out of his
head.  He had often wondered whether it might not be a good idea to work
out a written defence and hand it in to the court.  It would contain a
short description of his life and explain why he had acted the way he
had at each event that was in any way important, whether he now
considered he had acted well or ill, and his reasons for each.  There
was no doubt of the advantages a written defence of this sort would have
over relying on the lawyer, who was anyway not without his shortcomings.
K. had no idea what actions the lawyer was taking; it was certainly not
a lot, it was more than a month since the lawyer had summoned him, and
none of the previous discussions had given K. the impression that this
man would be able to do much for him.  Most importantly, he had asked
him hardly any questions.  And there were so many questions here to be
asked.  Asking questions were the most important thing.  K. had the
feeling that he would be able to ask all the questions needed here
himself.  The lawyer, in contrast, did not ask questions but did all the
talking himself or sat silently facing him, leant forward slightly over
the desk, probably because he was hard of hearing, pulled on a strand of
hair in the middle of his beard and looked down at the carpet, perhaps
at the very spot where K. had lain with Leni.  Now and then he would
give K. some vague warning of the sort you give to children.  His
speeches were as pointless as they were boring, and K. decided that when
the final bill came he would pay not a penny for them.  Once the lawyer
thought he had humiliated K. sufficiently, he usually started something
that would raise his spirits again.  He had already, he would then say,
won many such cases, partly or in whole, cases which may not really have
been as difficult as this one but which, on the face of it, had even
less hope of success.  He had a list of these cases here in the drawer -
here he would tap on one or other of the drawers in his desk - but
could, unfortunately, not show them to K. as they dealt with official
secrets.  Nonetheless, the great experience he had acquired through all
these cases would, of course, be of benefit to K.  He had, of course,
begun work straight away and was nearly ready to submit the first
documents.  They would be very important because the first impression
made by the defence will often determine the whole course of the
proceedings.  Unfortunately, though, he would still have to make it
clear to K. that the first documents submitted are sometimes not even
read by the court.  They simply put them with the other documents and
point out that, for the time being, questioning and observing the
accused are much more important than anything written.  If the applicant
becomes insistent, then they add that before they come to any decision,
as soon as all the material has been brought together, with due regard,
of course, to all the documents, then these first documents to have been
submitted will also be checked over.  But unfortunately, even this is
not usually true, the first documents submitted are usually mislaid or
lost completely, and even if they do keep them right to the end they are
hardly read, although the lawyer only knew about this from rumour.  This
is all very regrettable, but not entirely without its justifications.
But K. should not forget that the trial would not be public, if the
court deems it necessary it can be made public but there is no law that
says it has to be.  As a result, the accused and his defence don't have
access even to the court records, and especially not to the indictment,
and that means we generally don't know - or at least not precisely -
what the first documents need to be about, which means that if they do
contain anything of relevance to the case it's only by a lucky
coincidence.  If anything about the individual charges and the reasons
for them comes out clearly or can be guessed at while the accused is
being questioned, then it's possible to work out and submit documents
that really direct the issue and present proof, but not before.
Conditions like this, of course, place the defence in a very
unfavourable and difficult position.  But that is what they intend.  In
fact, defence is not really allowed under the law, it's only tolerated,
and there is even some dispute about whether the relevant parts of the
law imply even that.  So strictly speaking, there is no such thing as a
counsel acknowledged by the court, and anyone who comes before this
court as counsel is basically no more than a barrack room lawyer.  The
effect of all this, of course, is to remove the dignity of the whole
procedure, the next time K. is in the court offices he might like to
have a look in at the lawyers' room, just so that he's seen it.  He
might well be quite shocked by the people he sees assembled there.  The
room they've been allocated, with its narrow space and low ceiling, will
be enough to show what contempt the court has for these people.  The
only light in the room comes through a little window that is so high up
that, if you want to look out of it, you first have to get one of your
colleagues to support you on his back, and even then the smoke from the
chimney just in front of it will go up your nose and make your face
black.  In the floor of this room - to give yet another example of the
conditions there - there is a hole that's been there for more than a
year, it's not so big that a man could fall through, but it is big
enough for your foot to disappear through it.  The lawyers' room is on
the second floor of the attic; if your foot does go through it will hang
down into the first floor of the attic underneath it, and right in the
corridor where the litigants are waiting.  It's no exaggeration when
lawyers say that conditions like that are a disgrace.  Complaints to the
management don't have the slightest effect, but the lawyers are strictly
forbidden to alter anything in the room at their own expense.  But even
treating the lawyers in this way has its reasons.  They want, as far as
possible, to prevent any kind of defence, everything should be made the
responsibility of the accused.  Not a bad point of view, basically, but
nothing could be more mistaken than to think from that that lawyers are
not necessary for the accused in this court.  On the contrary, there is
no court where they are less needed than here.  This is because
proceedings are generally kept secret not only from the public but also
from the accused.  Only as far as that is possible, of course, but it is
possible to a very large extent.  And the accused doesn't get to see the
court records either, and it's very difficult to infer what's in the
court records from what's been said during questioning based on them,
especially for the accused who is in a difficult situation and is faced
with every possible worry to distract him.  This is when the defence
begins.  Counsel for the defence are not normally allowed to be present
while the accused is being questioned, so afterwards, and if possible
still at the door of the interview room, he has to learn what he can
about it from him and extract whatever he can that might be of use, even
though what the accused has to report is often very confused.  But that
is not the most important thing, as there's really not a lot that can be
learned in this way, although in this, as with anything else, a
competent man will learn more than another.  Nonetheless, the most
important thing is the lawyer's personal connections, that's where the
real value of taking counsel lies.  Now K. will most likely have already
learned from his own experience that, among its very lowest orders, the
court organisation does have its imperfections, the court is strictly
closed to the public, but staff who forget their duty or who take bribes
do, to some extent, show where the gaps are. This is where most lawyers
will push their way in, this is where bribes are paid and information
extracted, there have even, in earlier times at least, been incidents
where documents have been stolen.  There's no denying that some
surprisingly favourable results have been attained for the accused in
this way, for a limited time, and these petty advocates then strut to
and fro on the basis of them and attract new clients, but for the
further course of the proceedings it signifies either nothing or nothing
good.  The only things of real value are honest personal contacts,
contacts with higher officials, albeit higher officials of the lower
grades, you understand.  That is the only way the progress of the trial
can be influenced, hardly noticeable at first, it's true, but from then
on it becomes more and more visible.  There are, of course, not many
lawyers who can do this, and K. has made a very good choice in this
matter.  There were probably no more than one or two who had as many
contacts as Dr. Huld, but they don't bother with the company of the
lawyers' room and have nothing to do with it.  This means they have all
the less contact with the court officials.  It is not at all necessary
for Dr. Huld to go to the court, wait in the ante-rooms for the
examining judges to turn up, if they turn up, and try to achieve
something which, according to the judges' mood is usually more apparent
than real and most often not even that.  No, K. has seen for himself
that the court officials, including some who are quite high up, come
forward without being asked, are glad to give information which is fully
open or at least easy to understand, they discuss the next stages in the
proceedings, in fact in some cases they can be won over and are quite
willing to adopt the other person's point of view.  However, when this
happens, you should never trust them too far, as however firmly they may
have declared this new point of view in favour of the defendant they
might well go straight back to their offices and write a report for the
court that says just the opposite, and might well be even harder on the
defendant than the original view, the one they insist they've been fully
dissuaded from.  And, of course, there's no way of defending yourself
from this, something said in private is indeed in private and cannot
then be used in public, it's not something that makes it easy for the
defence to keep those gentlemen's favour.  On the other hand, it's also
true that the gentlemen don't become involved with the defence - which
will of course be done with great expertise - just for philanthropic
reasons or in order to be friendly, in some respects it would be truer
to say that they, too, have it allocated to them.  This is where the
disadvantages of a court structure that, right from the start,
stipulates that all proceedings take place in private, come into force.
In normal, mediocre trials its officials have contact with the public,
and they're very well equipped for it, but here they don't; normal
trials run their course all by themselves, almost, and just need a nudge
here and there; but when they're faced with cases that are especially
difficult they're as lost as they often are with ones that are very
simple; they're forced to spend all their time, day and night, with
their laws, and so they don't have the right feel for human
relationships, and that's a serious shortcoming in cases like this.
That's when they come for advice to the lawyer, with a servant behind
them carrying the documents which normally are kept so secret.  You
could have seen many gentlemen at this window, gentlemen of whom you
would least expect it, staring out this window in despair on the street
below while the lawyer is at his desk studying the documents so that he
can give them good advice.  And at times like that it's also possible to
see how exceptionally seriously these gentlemen take their professions
and how they are thrown into great confusion by difficulties which it's
just not in their natures to overcome.  But they're not in an easy
position, to regard their positions as easy would be to do them an
injustice.  The different ranks and hierarchies of the court are
endless, and even someone who knows his way around them cannot always
tell what's going to happen.  But even for the junior officials, the
proceedings in the courtrooms are usually kept secret, so they are
hardly able to see how the cases they work with proceed, court affairs
appear in their range of vision often without their knowing where they
come from and they move on further without their learning where they go.
So civil servants like this are not able to learn the things you can
learn from studying the successive stages that individual trials go
through, the final verdict or the reasons for it.  They're only allowed
to deal with that part of the trial which the law allocates them, and
they usually know less about the results of their work after it's left
them than the defence does, even though the defence will usually stay in
contact with the accused until the trial is nearly at its end, so that
the court officials can learn many useful things from the defence.
Bearing all this in mind, does it still surprise K. that the officials
are irritated and often express themselves about the litigants in
unflattering ways - which is an experience shared by everyone.  All the
officials are irritated, even when they appear calm.  This causes many
difficulties for the junior advocates, of course.  There is a story, for
instance, that has very much the ring of truth about it.  It goes like
this: One of the older officials, a good and peaceful man, was dealing
with a difficult matter for the court which had become very confused,
especially thanks to the contributions from the lawyers.  He had been
studying it for a day and a night without a break - as these officials
are indeed hard working, no-one works as hard as they do.  When it was
nearly morning, and he had been working for twenty-four hours with
probably very little result, he went to the front entrance, waited there
in ambush, and every time a lawyer tried to enter the building he would
throw him down the steps.  The lawyers gathered together down in front
of the steps and discussed with each other what they should do; on the
one hand they had actually no right to be allowed into the building so
that there was hardly anything that they could legally do to the
official and, as I've already mentioned, they would have to be careful
not to set all the officials against them.  On the other hand, any day
not spent in court is a day lost for them and it was a matter of some
importance to force their way inside.  In the end, they agreed that they
would try to tire the old man out.  One lawyer after another was sent
out to run up the steps and let himself be thrown down again, offering
what resistance he could as long as it was passive resistance, and his
colleagues would catch him at the bottom of the steps.  That went on for
about an hour until the old gentleman, who was already exhausted from
working all night, was very tired and went back to his office.  Those
who were at the bottom of the steps could not believe it at first, so
they sent somebody out to go and look behind the door to see if there
really was no-one there, and only then did they all gather together and
probably didn't even dare to complain, as it's far from being the
lawyers' job to introduce any improvements in the court system, or even
to want to.  Even the most junior lawyer can understand the relationship
there to some extent, but one significant point is that almost every
defendant, even very simple people, begins to think of suggestions for
improving the court as soon as his proceedings have begun, many of them
often even spend time and energy on the matter that could be spent far
better elsewhere.  The only right thing to do is to learn how to deal
with the situation as it is.  Even if it were possible to improve any
detail of it - which is anyway no more than superstitious nonsense - the
best that they could achieve, although doing themselves incalculable
harm in the process, is that they will have attracted the special
attention of the officials for any case that comes up in the future, and
the officials are always ready to seek revenge.  Never attract attention
to yourself!  Stay calm, however much it goes against your character!
Try to gain some insight into the size of the court organism and how, to
some extent, it remains in a state of suspension, and that even if you
alter something in one place you'll draw the ground out from under your
feet and might fall, whereas if an enormous organism like the court is
disrupted in any one place it finds it easy to provide a substitute for
itself somewhere else.  Everything is connected with everything else and
will continue without any change or else, which is quite probable, even
more closed, more attentive, more strict, more malevolent.  So it's best
to leave the work to the lawyers and not to keep disturbing them.  It
doesn't do much good to make accusations, especially if you can't make
it clear what they're based on and their full significance, but it must
be said that K. caused a great deal of harm to his own case by his
behaviour towards the office director, he was a very influential man but
now he might as well be struck off the list of those who might do
anything for K.  If the trial is mentioned, even just in passing,  it's
quite obvious that he's ignoring it.  These officials are in many ways
just like children.  Often, something quite harmless - although K.'s
behaviour could unfortunately not be called harmless - will leave them
feeling so offended that they will even stop talking with good friends
of theirs, they turn away when they see them and do everything they can
to oppose them.  But then, with no particular reason, surprisingly
enough, some little joke that was only ever attempted because everything
seemed so hopeless will make them laugh and they'll be reconciled.
It's both difficult and hard at the same time to deal with them, and
there's hardly any reason for it.  It's sometimes quite astonishing that
a single, average life is enough to encompass so much that it's at all
possible ever to have any success in one's work here.  On the other
hand, there are also dark moments, such as everyone has, when you think
you've achieved nothing at all, when it seems that the only trials to
come to a good end are those that were determined to have a good end
from the start and would do so without any help, while all the others
are lost despite all the running to and fro, all the effort, all the
little, apparent successes that gave such joy.  Then you no longer feel
very sure of anything and, if asked about a trial that was doing well by
its own nature but which was turned for the worse because you assisted
in it, would not even dare deny that.  And even that is a kind of self-
confidence, but then it's the only one that's left.   Lawyers are
especially vulnerable to fits of depression of that sort - and they are
no more than fits of depression of course - when a case is suddenly
taken out of their hands after they've been conducting it satisfactorily
for some time.  That's probably the worst that can happen to a lawyer.
It's not that the accused takes the case away from him, that hardly ever
happens, once a defendant has taken on a certain lawyer he has to stay
with him whatever happens.  How could he ever carry on by himself after
he's taken on help from a lawyer?  No, that just doesn't happen, but
what does sometimes happen is that the trial takes on a course where the
lawyer may not go along with it.  Client and trial are both simply taken
away from the lawyer; and then even contact with the court officials
won't help, however good they are, as they don't know anything
themselves.  The trial will have entered a stage where no more help can
be given, where it's being processed in courts to which no-one has any
access, where the defendant cannot even be contacted by his lawyer.  You
come home one day and find all the documents you've submitted, which
you've worked hard to create and which you had the best hopes for, lying
on the desk, they've been sent back as they can't be carried through to
the next stage in the trial, they're just worthless scraps of paper.  It
doesn't mean that the case has been lost, not at all, or at least there
is no decisive reason for supposing so, it's just that you don't know
anything more about the case and won't be told anything of what's
happening.  Well, cases like that are the exceptions, I'm glad to say,
and even if K.'s trial is one of them, it's still, for the time being, a
long way off.  But there was still plenty of opportunity for lawyers to
get to work, and K. could be sure they would be made use of.  As he had
said, the time for submitting documents was still in the future and
there was no rush to prepare them, it was much more important to start
the initial discussions with the appropriate officials, and they had
already taken place.  With varying degrees of success, it must be said.
It was much better not to give away any details before their time, as in
that way K. could only be influenced unfavourably and his hopes might be
raised or he might be made too anxious, better just to say that some
individuals have spoken very favourably and shown themselves very
willing to help, although others have spoken less favourably, but even
they have not in any way refused to help.  So all in all, the results
are very encouraging, only you should certainly not draw any particular
conclusions as all preliminary proceedings begin in the same way and it
was only the way they developed further that would show what the value
of these preliminary proceedings has been.  Anyway, nothing has been
lost yet, and if we can succeed in getting the office director, despite
everything, on our side - and several actions have been undertaken to
this end - then everything is a clean wound, as a surgeon would say, and
we can wait for the results with some comfort.

        When he started talking on in this way the lawyer was quite
tireless.  He went through it all again every time K. went to see him.
There was always some progress, but he could never be told what sort of
progress it was.  The first set of documents to be submitted were being
worked on but still not ready, which usually turned out to be a great
advantage the next time K. went to see him as the earlier occasion would
have been a very bad time to put them in, which they could not then have
known.  If K., stupefied from all this talking, ever pointed out that
even considering all these difficulties progress was very slow, the
lawyer would object that progress was not slow at all, but that they
might have progressed far further if K. had come to him at the right
time.  But he had come to him late and that lateness would bring still
further difficulties, and not only where time was concerned.  The only
welcome interruption during these visits was always when Leni contrived
to bring the lawyer his tea while K. was there.  Then she would stand
behind K. - pretending to watch the lawyer as he bent greedily over his
cup, poured the tea in and drank - and secretly let K. hold her hand.
There was always complete silence.  The lawyer drank.  K. squeezed
Leni's hand and Leni would sometimes dare to gently stroke K.'s hair.
"Still here, are you?" the lawyer would ask when he was ready.  "I
wanted to take the dishes away," said Leni, they would give each other's
hands a final squeeze, the lawyer would wipe his mouth and then start
talking at K. again with renewed energy.

        Was the lawyer trying to comfort K. or to confuse him?  K. could
not tell, but it seemed clear to him that his defence was not in good
hands.  Maybe everything the lawyer said was quite right, even though he
obviously wanted to make himself as conspicuous as possible and probably
had never even taken on a case as important as he said K.'s was.  But it
was still suspicious how he continually mentioned his personal contacts
with the civil servants.  Were they to be exploited solely for K.'s
benefit?  The lawyer never forgot to mention that they were dealing only
with junior officials, which meant officials who were dependent on
others, and the direction taken in each trial could be important for
their own furtherment.  Could it be that they were making use of the
lawyer to turn trials in a certain direction, which would, of course,
always be at the cost of the defendant?  It certainly did not mean that
they would do that in every trial, that was not likely at all, and there
were probably also trials where they gave the lawyer advantages and all
the room he needed to turn it in the direction he wanted, as it would
also be to their advantage to keep his reputation intact.  If that
really was their relationship, how would they direct K.'s trial which,
as the lawyer had explained, was especially difficult and therefore
important enough to attract great attention from the very first time it
came to court?  There could not be much doubt about what they would do.
The first signs of it could already be seen in the fact that the first
documents still had not been submitted even though the trial had already
lasted several months, and that, according to the lawyer, everything was
still in its initial stages, which was very effective, of course, in
making the defendant passive and keeping him helpless.  Then he could be
suddenly surprised with the verdict, or at least with a notification
that the hearing had not decided in his favour and the matter would be
passed on to a higher office.

        It was essential that K. take a hand in it himself.  On winter's
mornings such as this, when he was very tired and everything dragged
itself lethargically through his head, this belief of his seemed
irrefutable.  He no longer felt the contempt for the trial that he had
had earlier.  If he had been alone in the world it would have been easy
for him to ignore it, although it was also certain that, in that case,
the trial would never have arisen in the first place.  But now, his
uncle had already dragged him to see the lawyer, he had to take account
of his family; his job was no longer totally separate from the progress
of the trial, he himself had carelessly - with a certain, inexplicable
complacency - mentioned it to acquaintances and others had learned about
it in ways he did not know, his relationship with Miss Bürstner seemed
to be in trouble because of it.  In short, he no longer had any choice
whether he would accept the trial or turn it down, he was in the middle
of it and had to defend himself.  If he was tired, then that was bad.

        But there was no reason to worry too much before he needed to.  He
had been capable of working himself up to his high position in the bank
in a relatively short time and to retain it with respect from everyone,
now he simply had to apply some of the talents that had made that
possible for him to the trial, and there was no doubt that it had to
turn out well.  The most important thing, if something was to be
achieved, was to reject in advance any idea that he might be in any way
guilty.  There was no guilt.  The trial was nothing but a big piece of
business, just like he had already concluded to the benefit of the bank
many times, a piece of business that concealed many lurking dangers
waiting in ambush for him, as they usually did, and these dangers would
need to be defended against.  If that was to be achieved then he must
not entertain any idea of guilt, whatever he did, he would need to look
after his own interests as closely as he could.  Seen in this way, there
was no choice but to take his representation away from the lawyer very
soon, at best that very evening.  The lawyer had told him, as he talked
to him, that that was something unheard of and would probably do him a
great deal of harm, but K. could not tolerate any impediment to his
efforts where his trial was concerned, and these impediments were
probably caused by the lawyer himself.  But once he had shaken off the
lawyer the documents would need to be submitted straight away and, if
possible, he would need to see to it that they were being dealt with
every day.  It would of course not be enough, if that was to be done,
for K. to sit in the corridor with his hat under the bench like the
others.  Day after day, he himself, or one of the women or somebody else
on his behalf, would have to run after the officials and force them to
sit at their desks and study K.'s documents instead of looking out on
the corridor through the grating.  There could be no let-up in these
efforts, everything would need to be organised and supervised, it was
about time that the court came up against a defendant who knew how to
defend and make use of his rights.

        But when K. had the confidence to try and do all this the
difficulty of composing the documents was too much for him.  Earlier,
just a week or so before, he could only have felt shame at the thought
of being made to write out such documents himself;  it had never entered
his head that the task could also be difficult.  He remembered one
morning when, already piled up with work, he suddenly shoved everything
to one side and took a pad of paper on which he sketched out some of his
thoughts on how documents of this sort should proceed.  Perhaps he would
offer them to that slow-witted lawyer, but just then the door of the
manager's office opened and the deputy-director entered the room with a
loud laugh.  K. was very embarrassed, although the deputy-director, of
course, was not laughing at K.'s documents, which he knew nothing about,
but at a joke he had just heard about the stock-exchange, a joke which
needed an illustration if it was to be understood, and now the deputy-
director leant over K.'s desk, took his pencil from his hand, and drew
the illustration on the writing pad that K. had intended for his ideas
about his case.

        K. now had no more thoughts of shame, the documents had to be
prepared and submitted.  If, as was very likely, he could find no time
to do it in the office he would have to do it at home at night.  If the
nights weren't enough he would have to take a holiday.  Above all, he could
not stop half way, that was nonsense not only in business but always and
everywhere.  Needless to say, the documents would mean an almost endless
amount of work.  It was easy to come to the belief, not only for those
of an anxious disposition, that it was impossible ever to finish it.
This was not because of laziness or deceit, which were the only things
that might have hindered the lawyer in preparing it, but because he did
not know what the charge was or even what consequences it might bring,
so that he had to remember every tiny action and event from the whole of
his life, looking at them from all sides and checking and reconsidering
them.  It was also a very disheartening job.  It would have been more
suitable as a way of passing the long days after he had retired and
become senile.  But now, just when K. needed to apply all his thoughts
to his work, when he was still rising and already posed a threat to the
deputy-director, when every hour passed so quickly and he wanted to
enjoy the brief evenings and nights as a young man, this was the time he
had to start working out these documents.  Once more, he began to feel
resentment.  Almost involuntarily, only to put an end to it, his finger
felt for the button of the electric bell in the ante-room.  As he
pressed it he glanced up to the clock.  It was eleven o'clock, two
hours, he had spent a great deal of his costly time just dreaming and
his wits were, of course, even more dulled than they had been before.
But the time had, nonetheless, not been wasted, he had come to some
decisions that could be of value.  As well as various pieces of mail,
the servitors brought two visiting cards from gentlemen who had already
been waiting for K. for some time.  They were actually very important
clients of the bank who should not really have been kept waiting under
any circumstances.  Why had they come at such an awkward time, and why,
the gentlemen on the other side of the closed door seemed to be asking,
was the industrious K. using up the best business time for his private
affairs?  Tired from what had gone before, and tired in anticipation of
what was to follow, K. stood up to receive the first of them.

        He was a short, jolly man, a manufacturer who K. knew well.  He
apologised for disturbing K. at some important work, and K., for his
part, apologised for having kept the manufacturer waiting for so long.
But even this apology was spoken in such a mechanical way and with such
false intonation that the manufacturer would certainly have noticed if
he had not been fully preoccupied with his business affairs.  Instead,
he hurriedly pulled calculations and tables out from all his pockets,
spread them out in front of K., explained several items, corrected a
little mistake in the arithmetic that he noticed as he quickly glanced
over it all, and reminded K. of a similar piece of business he'd
concluded with him about a year before, mentioning in passing that this
time there was another bank  spending great effort to get his business,
and finally stopped speaking in order to learn K.'s opinion on the
matter.  And K. had indeed, at first, been closely following what the
manufacturer was saying, he too was aware of how important the deal was,
but unfortunately it did not last, he soon stopped listening, nodded at
each of the manufacturer's louder exclamations for a short while, but
eventually he stopped doing even that and did no more than stare at the
bald head bent over the papers, asking himself when the manufacturer
would finally realise that everything he was saying was useless.  When
he did stop talking, K. really thought at first that this was so that he
would have the chance to confess that he was incapable of listening.
Instead, seeing the anticipation on the manufacturer's face, obviously
ready to counter any objections made, he was sorry to realise that the
business discussion had to be continued.  So he bent his head as if he'd
been given an order and began slowly to move his pencil over the papers,
now and then he would stop and stare at one of the figures.  The
manufacturer thought there must be some objection, perhaps his figures
weren't really sound, perhaps they weren't the decisive issue, whatever
he thought, the manufacturer covered the papers with his hand and began
once again, moving very close to K., to explain what the deal was all
about.  "It is difficult," said K., pursing his lips. The only thing
that could offer him any guidance were the papers, and the manufacturer
had covered them from his view, so he just sank back against the arm of
the chair.  Even when the door of the manager's office opened and
revealed not very clearly, as if through a veil, the deputy director, he
did no more than look up weakly.  K. thought no more about the matter,
he merely watched the immediate effect of the deputy director's
appearance and, for him, the effect was very pleasing;  the manufacturer
immediately jumped up from his seat and hurried over to meet the deputy
director, although K. would have liked to make him ten times livelier as
he feared the deputy director might disappear again.  He need not have
worried, the two gentlemen met each other, shook each other's hand and
went together over to K.'s desk.  The manufacturer said he was sorry to
find the chief clerk so little inclined to do business, pointing to K.
who, under the view of the deputy director, had bent back down over the
papers.  As the two men leant over the desk and the manufacturer made
some effort to gain and keep the deputy director's attention, K. felt as
if they were much bigger than they really were and that their
negotiations were about him.  Carefully and slowly turning his eyes
upwards, he tried to learn what was taking place above him, took one of
the papers from his desk without looking to see what it was, lay it on
the flat of his hand and raised it slowly up as he rose up to the level
of the two men himself.  He had no particular plan in mind as he did
this, but merely felt this was how he would act if only he had finished
preparing that great document that was to remove his burden entirely.
The deputy director had been paying all his attention to the
conversation and did no more than glance at the paper, he did not read
what was written on it at all as what was important for the chief clerk
was not important for him, he took it from K.'s hand saying, "Thank you,
I'm already familiar with everything", and lay it calmly back on the
desk.  K. gave him a bitter, sideways look.  But the deputy director did
not notice this at all, or if he did notice it it only raised his
spirits, he frequently laughed out loud, one time he clearly embarrassed
the manufacturer when he raised an objection in a witty way but drew him
immediately back out of his embarrassment by commenting adversely on
himself, and finally invited him into his office where they could bring
the matter to its conclusion.  "It's a very important matter," said the
manufacturer.  "I understand that completely.  And I'm sure the chief
clerk ..." - even as he said this he was actually speaking only to the
manufacturer - "will be very glad to have us take it off his hands.
This is something that needs calm consideration.  But he seems to be
over-burdened today, there are even some people in the room outside
who've been waiting there for hours for him."  K. still had enough
control of himself to turn away from the deputy director and direct his
friendly, albeit stiff, smile only at the manufacturer, he made no other
retaliation, bent down slightly and supported himself with both hands on
his desk like a clerk, and watched as the two gentlemen, still talking,
took the papers from his desk and disappeared into the manager's office.
In the doorway, the manufacturer turned and said he wouldn't make his
farewell with K. just yet, he would of course let the chief clerk know
about the success of his discussions but he also had a little something
to tell him about.

        At last, K. was by himself.  It did not enter his head to show
anyone else into his office and only became vaguely aware of how nice it
was that the people outside thought he was still negotiating with the
manufacturer and, for this reason, he could not let anyone in to see
him, not even the servitor.  He went over to the window, sat down on the
ledge beside it, held firmly on to the handle and looked down onto the
square outside.  The snow was still falling, the weather still had not
brightened up at all.

        He remained a long time sitting in this way, not knowing what it
actually was that made him so anxious, only occasionally did he glance,
slightly startled, over his shoulder at the door to the outer room
where, mistakenly, he thought he'd heard some noise.  No-one came, and
that made him feel calmer, he went over to the wash stand, rinsed his
face with cold water and, his head somewhat clearer, went back to his
place by the window.  The decision to take his defence into his own
hands now seemed more of a burden than he had originally assumed.  All
the while he had left his defence up to the lawyer his trial had had
little basic affect on him, he had observed it from afar as something
that was scarcely able to reach him directly, when it suited him he
looked to see how things stood but he was also able to draw his head
back again whenever he wanted.  Now, in contrast, if he was to conduct
his defence himself, he would have to devote himself entirely to the
court - for the time being, at least - success would mean, later on, his
complete and conclusive liberation, but if he was to achieve this he
would have to place himself, to start with, in far greater danger than
he had been in so far.  If he ever felt tempted to doubt this, then his
experience with the deputy director and the manufacturer that day would
be quite enough to convince him of it.  How could he have sat there
totally convinced of the need to do his own defence?  How would it be
later?  What would his life be like in the days ahead?  Would he find
the way through it all to a happy conclusion?  Did a carefully worked
out defence - and any other sort would have made no sense - did a
carefully worked out defence not also mean he would need to shut himself
off from everything else as much as he could?  Would he survive that?
And how was he to succeed in conducting all this at the bank?  It
involved much more than just submitting some documents that he could
probably prepare in a few days' leave, although it would have been great
temerity to ask for time off from the bank just at that time, it was a
whole trial and there was no way of seeing how long it might last.  This
was an enormous difficulty that had suddenly been thrown into K.'s life!

        And was he supposed to be doing the bank's work at a time like
this?  He looked down at his desk.  Was he supposed to let people in to
see him and go into negotiations with them at a time like this?  While
his trial trundled on, while the court officials upstairs in the attic
room sat looking at the papers for this trial, should he be worrying
about the business of the bank?  Did this not seem like a kind of
torture, acknowledged by the court, connected with the trial and which
followed him around?  And is it likely that anyone in the bank, when
judging his work, would take any account of his peculiar situation?  No-
one and never.  There were those who knew about his trial, although it
was not quite clear who knew about it or how much.  But he hoped rumours
had not reached as far as the deputy director, otherwise he would
obviously soon find a way of making use of it to harm K., he would show
neither comradeship nor humaneness.  And what about the director?  It
was true that he was well disposed towards K., and as soon as he heard
about the trial he would probably try to do everything he could to make
it easier for him, but he would certainly not devote himself to it.  K.
at one time had provided the counter-balance to what the deputy director
said but the director was now coming more and more under his influence,
and the deputy director would also exploit the weakened condition of the
director to strengthen his own power.  So what could K. hope for?  Maybe
considerations of this sort weakened his power of resistance, but it was
still necessary not to deceive oneself and to see everything as clearly
as it could be seen at that moment.

        For no particular reason, just to avoiding returning to his desk
for a while, he opened the window.  It was difficult to open and he had
to turn the handle with both his hands.  Then, through the whole height
and breadth of the window, the mixture of fog and smoke was drawn into
the room, filling it with a slight smell of burning.  A few flakes of
snow were blown in with it.  "It's a horrible autumn," said the
manufacturer, who had come into the room unnoticed after seeing the
deputy director and now stood behind K.  K. nodded and looked uneasily
at the manufacturer's briefcase, from which he would now probably take
the papers and inform K. of the result of his negotiations with the
deputy director.  However, the manufacturer saw where K. was looking,
knocked on his briefcase and without opening it said, "You'll be wanting
to hear how things turned out.  I've already got the contract in my
pocket, almost.  He's a charming man, your deputy director - he's got
his dangers, though."  He laughed as he shook K.'s hand and wanted to
make him laugh with him.  But to K., it once more seemed suspicious that
the manufacturer did not want to show him the papers and saw nothing
about his comments to laugh at.  "Chief clerk," said the manufacturer,
"I expect the weather's been affecting your mood, has it? You're looking
so worried today."   "Yes," said K., raising his hand and holding the
temple of his head, "headaches, worries in the family."  "Quite right,"
said the manufacturer, who was always in a hurry and could never listen
to anyone for very long, "everyone has his cross to bear."  K. had
unconsciously made a step towards the door as if wanting to show the
manufacturer out, but the manufacturer said, "Chief clerk, there's
something else I'd like to mention to you.  I'm very sorry if it's
something that'll be a burden to you today of all days but I've been to
see you twice already, lately, and each time I forgot all about it.  If
I delay it any longer it might well lose its point altogether.  That
would be a pity, as I think what I've got to say does have some value."
Before K. had had the time to answer, the manufacturer came up close to
him, tapped his knuckle lightly on his chest and said quietly, "You've
got a trial going on, haven't you?"  K. stepped back and immediately
exclaimed, "That's what the deputy director's been telling you!"  "No,
no," said the manufacturer, "how would the deputy director know about
it?"  "And what about you?" asked K., already more in control of
himself.  "I hear things about the court here and there," said the
manufacturer, "and that even applies to what it is that I wanted to tell
you about."  "There are so many people who have connections with the
court!" said K. with lowered head, and he led the manufacturer over to
his desk.  They sat down where they had been before, and the
manufacturer said, "I'm afraid it's not very much that I've got to tell
you about.  Only, in matters like this, it's best not to overlook the
tiniest details.  Besides, I really want to help you in some way,
however modest my help might be.  We've been good business partners up
till now, haven't we?  Well then."  K. wanted to apologise for his
behaviour in the conversation earlier that day, but the manufacturer
would tolerate no interruption, shoved his briefcase up high in his
armpit to show that he was in a hurry, and carried on.  "I know about
your case through a certain Titorelli.  He's a painter, Titorelli's just
his artistic name, I don't even know what his real name is.  He's been
coming to me in my office for years from time to time, and brings little
pictures with him which I buy more or less just for the sake of charity
as he's hardly more than a beggar.  And they're nice pictures, too,
moorland landscapes and that sort of thing.  We'd both got used to doing
business in this way and it always went smoothly.  Only, one time these
visits became a bit too frequent, I began to tell him off for it, we
started talking and I became interested how it was that he could earn a
living just by painting, and then I learned to my amazement that his
main source of income was painting portraits.  'I work for the court,'
he said, 'what court?' said I.  And that's when he told me about the
court.  I'm sure you can imagine how amazed I was at being told all
this.  Ever since then I learn something new about the court every time
he comes to visit, and so little by little I get to understand something
of how it works.  Anyway, Titorelli talks a lot and I often have to push
him away, not only because he's bound to be lying but also, most of all,
because a businessman like me who's already close to breaking point
under the weight of his own business worries can't pay too much
attention to other people's.  But all that's just by the by.  Perhaps -
this is what I've been thinking - perhaps Titorelli might be able to
help you in some small way, he knows lots of judges and even if he can't
have much influence himself he can give you some advice about how to get
some influential people on your side.  And even if this advice doesn't
turn out to make all the difference I still think it'll be very
important once you've got it.  You're nearly a lawyer yourself.  That's
what I always say, Mr. K. the chief clerk is nearly a lawyer.  Oh I'm
sure this trial of yours will turn out all right.  So do you want to go
and see Titorelli, then?  If I ask him to he'll certainly do everything
he possibly can.  I really do think you ought to go.  It needn't be
today, of course, just some time, when you get the chance.  And anyway -
I want to tell you this too -  you don't actually have to go and see
Titorelli, this advice from me doesn't place you under any obligation at
all.  No, if you think you can get by without Titorelli it'll certainly
be better to leave him completely out of it.  Maybe you've already got a
clear idea of what you're doing and Titorelli could upset your plans.
No, if that's the case then of course you shouldn't go there under any
circumstances!  And it certainly won't be easy to take advice from a lad
like that.  Still, it's up to you.  Here's the letter of recommendation
and here's the address."

        Disappointed, K. took the letter and put it in his pocket.  Even
at best, the advantage he might derive from this recommendation was
incomparably smaller than the damage that lay in the fact of the
manufacturer knowing about his trial, and that the painter was spreading
the news about.  It was all he could manage to give the manufacturer, who
was already on his way to the door, a few words of thanks.  "I'll go
there," he said as he took his leave of the manufacturer at the door,
"or, as I'm very busy at present, I'll write to him, perhaps he would
like to come to me in my office some time."  "I was sure you'd find the
best solution," said the manufacturer.  "Although I had thought you'd
prefer to avoid inviting people like this Titorelli to the bank and
talking about the trial here.  And it's not always a good idea to send
letters to people like Titorelli, you don't know what might happen to
them.  But you're bound to have thought everything through and you know
what you can and can't do."  K. nodded and accompanied the manufacturer
on through the ante-room.  But despite seeming calm on the outside he
was actually very shocked; he had told the manufacturer he would write
to Titorelli only to show him in some way that he valued his
recommendations and would consider the opportunity to speak with
Titorelli without delay, but if he had thought Titorelli could offer any
worthwhile assistance he would not have delayed.  But it was only the
manufacturer's comment that made K. realise what dangers that could lead
to.  Was he really able to rely on his own understanding so little?  If
it was possible that he might invite a questionable character into the
bank with a clear letter, and ask advice from him about his trial,
separated from the deputy director by no more than a door, was it not
possible or even very likely that there were also other dangers he had
failed to see or that he was even running towards?  There was not always
someone beside him to warn him.  And just now, just when he would have
to act with all the strength he could muster, now a number of doubts of
a sort he had never before known had presented themselves and affected
his own vigilance!  The difficulties he had been feeling in carrying out
his office work; were they now going to affect the trial too?  Now, at
least, he found himself quite unable to understand how he could have
intended to write to Titorelli and invite him into the bank.

        He shook his head at the thought of it once more as the servitor
came up beside him and drew his attention to the three gentlemen who
were waiting on a bench in the ante-room.  They had already been waiting
to see K. for a long time.  Now that the servitor was speaking with K.
they had stood up and each of them wanted to make use of the opportunity
to see K. before the others.  It had been negligent of the bank to let
them waste their time here in the waiting room, but none of them wanted
to draw attention to this.  "Mr. K., ..." one of them was saying, but K.
had told the servitor to fetch his winter coat and said to the three of
them, as the servitor helped him to put it on, "Please forgive me,
gentlemen, I'm afraid I have no time to see you at present.  Please do
forgive me but I have some urgent business to settle and have to leave
straight away.  You've already seen yourselves how long I've been
delayed.  Would you be so kind as to come back tomorrow or some time?
Or perhaps we could settle your affairs by telephone?  Or perhaps you
would like to tell me now, briefly, what it's about and I can then give
you a full answer in writing.  Whatever, the best thing will be for you
to come here again."   The gentlemen now saw that their wait had been
totally pointless, and these suggestions of K.'s left them so astounded
that they looked at each other without a word.  "That's agreed then, is
it?" asked K., who had turned toward the servitor bringing him his hat.
Through the open door of K.'s office they could see that the snowfall
outside had become much heavier.  So K. turned the collar of his coat up
and buttoned it up high under his chin.  Just then the deputy director
came out of the adjoining room, smiled as he saw K. negotiating with the
gentlemen in his winter coat, and asked, "Are you about to go out?"
"Yes," said K., standing more upright, "I have to go out on some
business."  But the deputy director had already turned towards the
gentlemen.  "And what about these gentlemen?" he asked.  "I think
they've already been waiting quite a long time."  "We've already come to
an understanding," said K.  But now the gentlemen could be held back no
longer, they surrounded K. and explained that they would not have been
waiting for hours if it had not been about something important that had
to be discussed now, at length and in private.  The deputy director
listened to them for a short while, he also looked at K. as he held his
hat in his hand cleaning the dust off it here and there, and then he
said, "Gentlemen, there is a very simple way to solve this.  If you
would prefer it, I'll be very glad to take over these negotiations
instead of the chief clerk.  Your business does, of course, need to be
discussed without delay.  We are businessmen like yourselves and know
the value of a businessman's time.  Would you like to come this way?"
And he opened the door leading to the ante-room of his own office.

        The deputy director seemed very good at appropriating everything
that K. was now forced to give up!  But was K. not giving up more than
he absolutely had to?  By running off to some unknown painter, with, as
he had to admit, very little hope of any vague benefit, his renown was
suffering damage that could not be repaired.  It would probably be much
better to take off his winter coat again and, at the very least, try to
win back the two gentlemen who were certainly still waiting in the next
room.  If K. had not then glimpsed the deputy director in his office,
looking for something from his bookshelves as if they were his own, he
would probably even have made the attempt.  As K., somewhat agitated,
approached the door the deputy director called out, "Oh, you've still
not left!"  He turned his face toward him - its many deep folds seemed
to show strength rather than age - and immediately began once more to
search.  "I'm looking for a copy of a contract," he said, "which this
gentleman  insists you must have.  Could you help me look for it, do you
think?"  K. made a step forward, but the deputy director said, "thank
you, I've already found it," and with a big package of papers, which
certainly must have included many more documents than just the copy of
the contract, he turned and went back into his own office.

        "I can't deal with him right now," K. said to himself, "but once
my personal difficulties have been settled, then he'll certainly be the
first to get the effect of it, and he certainly won't like it."
Slightly calmed by these thoughts, K. gave the servitor, who had already
long been holding the door to the corridor open for him, the task of
telling the director, when he was able, that K. was going out of the
bank on a business matter.  As he left the bank he felt almost happy at
the thought of being able to devote more of himself to his own business
for a while.

        He went straight to the painter, who lived in an outlying part of
town which was very near to the court offices, although this area was
even poorer, the houses were darker, the streets were full of dirt that
slowly blew about over the half-melted snow.   In the great gateway to
the building where the painter lived only one of the two doors was open,
a hole had been broken open in the wall by the other door, and as K.
approached it a repulsive, yellow, steaming liquid shot out causing some
rats to scurry away into the nearby canal.  Down by the staircase there
was a small child lying on its belly crying, but it could hardly be
heard because of the noise from a metal-workshop on the other side of
the entrance hall, drowning out any other sound.  The door to the
workshop was open, three workers stood in a circle around some piece of
work that they were beating with hammers.  A large tin plate hung on the
wall, casting a pale light that pushed its way in between two of the
workers, lighting up their faces and their work-aprons.  K. did no more
than glance at any of these things, he wanted to get things over with
here as soon as possible, to exchange just a few words to find out how
things stood with the painter and go straight back to the bank.  Even if
he had just some tiny success here it would still have a good effect on
his work at the bank for that day.  On the third floor he had to slow
down his pace, he was quite out of breath - the steps, just like the
height of each floor, were much higher than they needed to be and he'd
been told that the painter lived right up in the attic.  The air was
also quite oppressive, there was no proper stairwell and the narrow
steps were closed in by walls on both sides with no more than a small,
high window here and there.  Just as K. paused for a while some young
girls ran out of one of the flats and rushed higher up the stairs,
laughing.  K. followed them slowly, caught up with one of the girls who
had stumbled and been left behind by the others, and asked her as they
went up side by side, "Is there a painter, Titorelli, who lives here?"
The girl, hardly thirteen years old and somewhat hunchbacked, jabbed him
with her elbow and looked at him sideways.  Her youth and her bodily
defects had done nothing to stop her being already quite depraved.  She
did not smile once, but looked at K. earnestly, with sharp, acquisitive
eyes.  K. pretended not to notice her behaviour and asked, "Do you know
Titorelli, the painter?"  She nodded and asked in reply,  "What d'you
want to see him for?"  K. thought it would be to his advantage quickly
to find out something more about Titorelli.  "I want to have him paint
my portrait," he said.  "Paint your portrait?" she asked, opening her
mouth too wide and lightly hitting K. with her hand as if he had said
something extraordinarily surprising or clumsy, with both hands she
lifted her skirt, which was already very short, and, as fast as she
could, she ran off after the other girls whose indistinct shouts lost
themselves in the heights.  At the next turn of the stairs, however, K.
encountered all the girls once more.  The hunchbacked girl had clearly
told them about K.'s intentions and they were waiting for him.  They
stood on both sides of the stairs, pressing themselves against the wall
so that K. could get through between them, and smoothed their aprons
down with their hands.  All their faces, even in this guard of honour,
showed a mixture of childishness and depravity.  Up at the head of the
line of girls, who now, laughing, began to close in around K., was the
hunchback who had taken on the role of leader.  It was thanks to her
that K. found the right direction without delay - he would have
continued up the stairs straight in front of him, but she showed him
that to reach Titorelli he would need to turn off to one side.
The steps that led up to the painter were especially narrow, very long
without any turning, the whole length could be seen in one glance and,
at the top, at Titorelli's closed door, it came to its end.   This door
was much better illuminated than the rest of the stairway by the light
from a small skylight set obliquely above it, it had been put together
from unpainted planks of wood and the name 'Titorelli' was painted on it
in broad, red brushstrokes.  K. was no more than half way up the steps,
accompanied by his retinue of girls, when, clearly the result of the
noise of all those footsteps, the door opened slightly and in the crack
a man who seemed to be dressed in just his nightshirt appeared.  "Oh!"
he cried, when he saw the approaching crowd, and vanished.  The
hunchbacked girl clapped her hands in glee and the other girls crowded
in behind K. to push him faster forward.

        They still had not arrived at the top, however, when the painter
up above them suddenly pulled the door wide open and, with a deep bow,
invited K. to enter.  The girls, on the other hand, he tried to keep
away, he did not want to let any of them in however much they begged him
and however much they tried to get in - if they could not get in with
his permission they would try to force their way in against his will.
The only one to succeed was the hunchback when she slipped through under
his outstretched arm, but the painter chased after her, grabbed her by
the skirt, span her once round and set her down again by the door with
the other girls who, unlike the first, had not dared to cross the
doorstep while the painter had left his post.   K. did not know what he
was to make of all this, as they all seemed to be having fun.  One
behind the other, the girls by the door stretched their necks up high
and called out various words to the painter which were meant in jest but
which K. did not understand, and even the painter laughed as the
hunchback whirled round in his hand.  Then he shut the door, bowed once
more to K., offered him his hand and introduced himself, saying,
"Titorelli, painter".  K. pointed to the door, behind which the girls
were whispering, and said, "You seem to be very popular in this
building."  "Ach, those brats!" said the painter, trying in vain to
fasten his nightshirt at the neck.  He was also bare-footed and, apart
from that, was wearing nothing more than a loose pair of yellowish linen
trousers held up with a belt whose free end whipped to and fro.  "Those
kids are a real burden for me," he continued.  The top button of his
nightshirt came off and he gave up trying to fasten it, fetched a chair
for K. and made him sit down on it.  "I painted one of them once - she's
not here today - and ever since then they've been following me about.
If I'm here they only come in when I allow it, but as soon as I've gone
out there's always at least one of them in here.  They had a key made to
my door and lend it round to each other.  It's hard to imagine what a
pain that is.  Suppose I come back home with a lady I'm going to paint,
I open the door with my own key and find the hunchback there or
something, by the table painting her lips red with my paintbrush, and
meanwhile her little sisters will be keeping guard for her, moving about
and causing chaos in every corner of the room.  Or else, like happened
yesterday, I might come back home late in the evening - please forgive
my appearance and the room being in a mess, it is to do with them - so,
I might come home late in the evening and want to go to bed, then I feel
something pinching my leg, look under the bed and pull another of them
out from under it.  I don't know why it is they bother me like this, I
expect you've just seen that I do nothing to encourage them to come near
me.  And they make it hard for me to do my work too, of course.  If I
didn't get this studio for nothing I'd have moved out a long time ago."
Just then, a little voice, tender and anxious, called out from under the
door, "Titorelli, can we come in now?"  "No," answered the painter.
"Not even just me, by myself?" the voice asked again.  "Not even just
you," said the painter, as he went to the door and locked it.

        Meanwhile, K. had been looking round the room, if it had not been
pointed out it would never have occurred to him that this wretched
little room could be called a studio.  It was hardly long enough or
broad enough to make two steps.  Everything, floor, walls and ceiling,
was made of wood, between the planks narrow gaps could be seen.  Across
from where K. was, the bed stood against the wall under a covering of
many different colours.  In the middle of the room a picture stood on an
easel, covered over with a shirt whose arms dangled down to the ground.
Behind K. was the window through which the fog made it impossible to see
further than the snow covered roof of the neighbouring building.

        The turning of the key in the lock reminded K. that he had not
wanted to stay too long.  So he drew the manufacturer's letter out from
his pocket, held it out to the painter and said, "I learned about you
from this gentleman, an acquaintance of yours, and it's on  his advice
that I've come here".  The painter glanced through the letter and threw
it down onto the bed.  If the manufacturer had not said very clearly
that Titorelli was an acquaintance of his, a poor man who was dependent
on his charity, then it would really have been quite possible to believe
that Titorelli did not know him or at least that he could not remember
him.  This impression was augmented by the painter's asking, "Were you
wanting to buy some pictures or did you want to have yourself painted?"
K. looked at the painter in astonishment.  What did the letter actually
say?  K. had taken it as a matter of course that the manufacturer had
explained to the painter in his letter that K. wanted nothing more with
him than to find out more about his trial.  He had been far too rash in
coming here!  But now he had to give the painter some sort of answer
and, glancing at the easel, said, "Are you working on a picture
currently?"  "Yes," said the painter, and he took the shirt hanging over
the easel and threw it onto the bed after the letter.  "It's a portrait.
Quite a good piece of work, although it's not quite finished yet."  This
was a convenient coincidence for K., it gave him a good opportunity to
talk about the court as the picture showed, very clearly, a judge.
What's more, it was remarkably similar to the picture in the lawyer's
office, although this one showed a quite different judge, a heavy man
with a full beard which was black and bushy and extended to the sides
far up the man's cheeks.  The lawyer's picture was also an oil painting,
whereas this one had been made with pastel colours and was pale and
unclear.  But everything else about the picture was similar, as this
judge, too, was holding tightly to the arm of his throne and seemed
ominously about to rise from it.  At first K. was about to say, "He
certainly is a judge," but he held himself back for the time being and
went closer to the picture as if he wanted to study it in detail.  There
was a large figure shown in middle of the throne's back rest which K.
could not understand and asked the painter about it.  That'll need some
more work done on it, the painter told him, and taking a pastel crayon
from a small table he added a few strokes to the edges of the figure but
without making it any clearer as far as K. could make out.  "That's the
figure of justice," said the painter, finally.  "Now I see," said K.,
"here's the blindfold and here are the scales.  But aren't those wings
on her heels, and isn't she moving?"  "Yes," said the painter, "I had to
paint it like that according to the contract.  It's actually the figure
of justice and the goddess of victory all in one."  "That is not a good
combination," said K. with a smile.  "Justice needs to remain still,
otherwise the scales will move about and it won't be possible to make a
just verdict."  "I'm just doing what the client wanted," said the
painter.  "Yes, certainly," said K., who had not meant to criticise
anyone by that comment.  "You've painted the figure as it actually
appears on the throne."  "No,"  said the painter, "I've never seen that
figure or that throne, it's all just invention, but they told me what it
was I had to paint."  "How's that?" asked K. pretending not fully to
understand what the painter said.  "That is a judge sitting on the
judge's chair, isn't it?"  "Yes," said the painter, "but that judge
isn't very high up and he's never sat on any throne like that."  "And he
has himself painted in such a grand pose?  He's sitting there just like
the president of the court."  "Yeah, gentlemen like this are very vain,"
said the painter.  "But they have permission from higher up to get
themselves painted like this.  It's laid down quite strictly just what
sort of portrait each of them can get for himself.  Only it's a pity
that you can't make out the details of his costume and pose in this
picture, pastel colours aren't really suitable for showing people like
this."  "Yes," said K., "it does seem odd that it's in pastel colours."
"That's what the judge wanted," said the painter, "it's meant to be for
a woman."  The sight of the picture seemed to make him feel like
working, he rolled up his shirtsleeves, picked up a few of the crayons,
and K. watched as a reddish shadow built up around the head of the judge
under their quivering tips and radiated out the to edges of the picture.
This shadow play slowly surrounded the head like a decoration or lofty
distinction.  But around the figure of Justice, apart from some
coloration that was barely noticeable, it remained light, and in this
brightness the figure seemed to shine forward so that it now looked like
neither the God of Justice nor the God of Victory, it seemed now,
rather, to be a perfect depiction of the God of the Hunt.  K. found the
painter's work more engrossing than he had wanted; but finally he
reproached himself for staying so long without having done anything
relevant to his own affair.  "What's the name of this judge?" he asked
suddenly.  "I'm not allowed to tell you that," the painter answered.  He
was bent deeply over the picture and clearly neglecting his guest who,
at first, he had received with such care.  K. took this to be just a
foible of the painter's, and it irritated him as it made him lose time.
"I take it you must be a trustee of the court," he said.  The painter
immediately put his crayons down, stood upright, rubbed his hands
together and looked at K. with a smile.  "Always straight out with the
truth," he said. "You want to learn something about the court, like it
says in your letter of recommendation, but then you start talking about
my pictures to get me on your side.  Still, I won't hold it against you,
you weren't to know that that was entirely the wrong thing to try with
me. Oh, please!" he said sharply, repelling K.'s attempt to make some
objection.  He then continued, "And besides, you're quite right in your
comment that I'm a trustee of the court."  He made a pause, as if
wanting to give K. the time to come to terms with this fact.  The girls
could once more be heard from behind the door.  They were probably
pressed around the keyhole, perhaps they could even see into the room
through the gaps in the planks.  K. forewent the opportunity to excuse
himself in some way as he did not wish to distract the painter from what
he was saying, or else perhaps he didn't want him to get too far above
himself and in this way make himself to some extent unattainable, so he
asked, "Is that a publicly acknowledged position?"  "No," was the
painter's curt reply, as if the question prevented him saying any more.
But K. wanted him to continue speaking and said, "Well, positions like
that, that aren't officially acknowledged, can often have more influence
than those that are."  "And that's how it is with me," said the painter,
and nodded with a frown.  "I was talking about your case with the
manufacturer yesterday, and he asked me if I wouldn't like to help you,
and I answered: 'He can come and see me if he likes', and now I'm
pleased to see you here so soon.  This business seems to be quite
important to you, and, of course, I'm not surprised at that.  Would you
not like to take your coat off now?"  K. had intended to stay for only a
very short time, but the painter's invitation was nonetheless very
welcome.  The air in the room had slowly become quite oppressive for
him, he had several times looked in amazement at a small, iron stove in
the corner that certainly could not have been lit, the heat of the room
was inexplicable.  As he took off his winter overcoat and also
unbuttoned his frock coat the painter said to him in apology, "I must
have warmth.  And it is very cosy here, isn't it.  This room's very good
in that respect."  K. made no reply, but it was actually not the heat
that made him uncomfortable but, much more, the stuffiness, the air that
almost made it more difficult to breathe, the room had probably not been
ventilated for a long time.  The unpleasantness of this was made all the
stronger for K. when the painter invited him to sit on the bed while he
himself sat down on the only chair in the room in front of the easel.
The painter even seemed to misunderstand why K. remained at the edge of
the bed and urged K. to make himself comfortable, and as he hesitated he
went over to the bed himself and pressed K. deep down into the
bedclothes and pillows.  Then he went back to his seat and at last he
asked his first objective question, which made K. forget everything
else.  "You're innocent, are you?" he asked.  "Yes," said K.  He felt a
simple joy at answering this question, especially as the answer was
given to a private individual and therefore would have no consequences.
Up till then no-one had asked him this question so openly.  To make the
most of his pleasure he added, "I am totally innocent."  "So," said the
painter, and he lowered his head and seemed to be thinking.  Suddenly he
raised his head again and said, "Well if you're innocent it's all very
simple."  K. began to scowl, this supposed trustee of the court was
talking like an ignorant child.  "My being innocent does not make things
simple," said K.  Despite everything, he couldn't help smiling and
slowly shook his head.  "There are many fine details in which the court
gets lost, but in the end it reaches into some place where originally
there was nothing and pulls enormous guilt out of it."  "Yeah, yeah,
sure," said the painter, as if K. had been disturbing his train of
thought for no reason.  "But you are innocent, aren't you?"  "Well of
course I am," said K.  "That's the main thing," said the painter.  There
was no counter-argument that could influence him, but although he had
made up his mind it was not clear whether he was talking this way
because of conviction or indifference.  K., then, wanted to find out and
said therefore, "I'm sure you're more familiar with the court than I am,
I know hardly more about it than what I've heard, and that's been from
many very different people.  But they were all agreed on one thing, and
that was that when ill thought-out accusations are made they are not
ignored, and that once the court has made an accusation it is convinced
of the guilt of the defendant and it's very hard to make it think
otherwise."  "Very hard?" the painter asked, throwing one hand up in the
air.  "It's impossible to make it think otherwise.  If I painted all the
judges next to each other here on canvas, and you were trying to defend
yourself in front of it, you'd have more success with them than you'd
ever have with the real court."  "Yes," said K. to himself, forgetting
that he had only gone there to investigate the painter.

        One of the girls behind the door started up again, and asked,
"Titorelli, is he going to go soon?"  "Quiet!" shouted the painter at
the door, "Can't you see I'm talking with the gentleman?"  But this was
not enough to satisfy the girl and she asked, "You going to paint his
picture?"  And when the painter didn't answer she added, "Please don't
paint him, he's an 'orrible bloke."  There followed an incomprehensible,
interwoven babble of shouts and replies and calls of agreement.  The
painter leapt over to the door, opened it very slightly - the girls'
clasped hands could be seen stretching through the crack as if they
wanted something - and said, "If you're not quiet I'll throw you all
down the stairs.  Sit down here on the steps and be quiet."  They
probably did not obey him immediately, so that he had to command, "Down
on the steps!"  Only then it became quiet.

        "I'm sorry about that," said the painter as he returned to K.  K.
had hardly turned towards the door, he had left it completely up to the
painter whether and how he would place him under his protection if he
wanted to.  Even now, he made hardly any movement as the painter bent
over him and, whispering into his ear in order not to be heard outside,
said, "These girls belong to the court as well."  "How's that?" asked
K., as he leant his head to one side and looked at the painter.  But the
painter sat back down on his chair and, half in jest, half in
explanation, "Well, everything belongs to the court."  "That is
something I had never noticed until now," said K. curtly, this general
comment of the painter's made his comment about the girls far less
disturbing.  Nonetheless, K. looked for a while at the door, behind
which the girls were now sitting quietly on the steps.  Except, that one
of them had pushed a drinking straw through a crack between the planks
and was moving it slowly up and down.  "You still don't seem to have
much general idea of what the court's about", said the painter, who had
stretched his legs wide apart and was tapping loudly on the floor with
the tip of his foot. "But as you're innocent you won't need it anyway.
I'll get you out of this by myself."  "How do you intend to do that?"
asked K.  "You did say yourself not long ago that it's quite impossible
to go to the court with reasons and proofs."  "Only impossible for
reasons and proofs you take to the court yourself"  said the painter,
raising his forefinger as if K. had failed to notice a fine distinction.
"It goes differently if you try to do something behind the public court,
that's to say in the consultation rooms, in the corridors or here, for
instance, in my studio."  K. now began to find it far easier to believe
what the painter was saying, or rather it was largely in agreement with
what he had also been told by others.  In fact it was even quite
promising.  If it really was so easy to influence the judges through
personal contacts as the lawyer had said then the painter's contacts
with these vain judges was especially important, and at the very least
should not be undervalued.  And the painter would fit in very well in
the circle of assistants that K. was slowly gathering around himself.
He had been noted at the bank for his talent in organising, here, where
he was placed entirely on his own resources, would be a good opportunity
to test that talent to its limits.  The painter observed the effect his
explanation had had on K. and then, with a certain unease, said, "Does
it not occur to you that the way I'm speaking is almost like a lawyer?
It's the incessant contact with the gentlemen of the court has that
influence on me.  I gain a lot by it, of course, but I lose a lot,
artistically speaking."   "How did you first come into contact with the
judges, then?" asked K., he wanted first to gain the painter's trust
before he took him into his service.  "That was very easy," said the
painter, "I inherited these contacts.  My father was court painter
before me.  It's a position that's always inherited.  They can't use new
people for it, the rules governing how the various grades of officials
are painted are so many and varied, and, above all, so secret that no-
one outside of certain families even knows them.  In the drawer there,
for instance, I've got my father's notes, which I don't show to anyone.
But you're only able to paint judges if you know what they say.
Although, even if I lost them no-one could ever dispute my position
because of all the rules I just carry round in my head.  All the judges
want to be painted like the old, great judges were, and I'm the only one
who can do that."  "You are to be envied," said K., thinking of his
position at the bank.  "Your position is quite unassailable, then?"
"Yes, quite unassailable," said the painter, and he raised his shoulders
in pride. "That's how I can even afford to help some poor man facing
trial now and then."  "And how do you do that?" asked K., as if the
painter had not just described him as a poor man.  The painter did not
let himself be distracted, but said, "In your case, for instance, as
you're totally innocent, this is what I'll do."  The repeated mention of
K.'s innocence was becoming irksome to him.  It sometimes seemed to him
as if the painter was using these comments to make a favourable outcome
to the trial a precondition for his help, which of course would make the
help itself unnecessary.  But despite these doubts K. forced himself not
to interrupt the painter.  He did not want to do without the painter's
help, that was what he had decided, and this help did not seem in any
way less questionable than that of the lawyer.  K. valued the painter's
help far more highly because it was offered in a way that was more
harmless and open.

        The painter had pulled his seat closer to the bed and continued in
a subdued voice: "I forgot to ask you; what sort of acquittal is it you
want?  There are three possibilities; absolute acquittal, apparent
acquittal and deferment.  Absolute acquittal is the best, of course,
only there's nothing I could do to get that sort of outcome.  I don't
think there's anyone at all who could do anything to get an absolute
acquittal.  Probably the only thing that could do that is if the accused
is innocent.  As you are innocent it could actually be possible and you
could depend on your innocence alone.  In that case you won't need me or
any other kind of help."

        At first, K. was astonished at this orderly explanation, but then,
just as quietly as the painter, he said, "I think you're contradicting
yourself."  "How's that?" asked the painter patiently, leaning back with
a smile.  This smile made K. feel as if he were examining not the words
of the painter but seeking out inconsistencies in the procedures of the
court itself.  Nonetheless, he continued unabashed and said, "You
remarked earlier that the court cannot be approached with reasoned
proofs, you later restricted this to the open court, and now you go so
far as to say that an innocent man needs no assistance in court.  That
entails a contradiction.  Moreover, you said earlier that the judges can
be influenced personally but now you insist that an absolute acquittal,
as you call it, can never be attained through personal influence.  That
entails a second contradiction."  "It's quite easy to clear up these
contradictions," said the painter.  "We're talking about two different
things here, there's what it says in the law and there's what I know
from my own experience, you shouldn't get the two confused.  I've never
seen it in writing, but the law does, of course, say on the one hand
that the innocent will be set free, but on the other hand it doesn't say
that the judges can be influenced.  But in my experience it's the other
way round.  I don't know of any absolute acquittals but I do know of
many times when a judge has been influenced.  It's possible, of course,
that there was no innocence in any of the cases I know about.  But is
that likely?  Not a single innocent defendant in so many cases?  When I
was a boy I used to listen closely to my father when he told us about
court cases at home, and the judges that came to his studio talked about
the court, in our circles nobody talks about anything else; I hardly
ever got the chance to go to court myself but always made use of it when
I could, I've listened to countless trials at important stages in their
development, I've followed them closely as far as they could be
followed, and I have to say that I've never seen a single acquittal."
"So.  Not a single acquittal," said K., as if talking to himself and his
hopes.  "That confirms the impression I already have of the court.  So
there's no point in it from this side either.  They could replace the
whole court with a single hangman."  "You shouldn't generalise," said
the painter, dissatisfied, "I've only been talking about my own
experience."  "Well that's enough," said K., "or have you heard of any
acquittals that happened earlier?"  "They say there have been some
acquittals earlier," the painter answered, "but it's very hard to be
sure about it.  The courts don't make their final conclusions public,
not even the judges are allowed to know about them, so that all we know
about these earlier cases are just legends.  But most of them did
involve absolute acquittals, you can believe that, but they can't be
proved.  On the other hand, you shouldn't forget all about them either,
I'm sure there is some truth to them, and they are very beautiful, I've
painted a few pictures myself depicting these legends."  "My assessment
will not be altered by mere legends," said K.  "I don't suppose it's
possible to cite these legends in court, is it?"  The painter laughed.
"No, you can't cite them in court," he said.  "Then there's no point in
talking about them," said K., he wanted, for the time being, to accept
anything the painter told him, even if he thought it unlikely or
contradicted what he had been told by others.  He did not now have the
time to examine the truth of everything the painter said or even to
disprove it, he would have achieved as much as he could if the painter
would help him in any way even if his help would not be decisive.  As a
result, he said, "So let's pay no more attention to absolute acquittal,
but you mentioned two other possibilities."  "Apparent acquittal and
deferment.  They're the only possibilities," said the painter.  "But
before we talk about them, would you not like to take your coat off?
You must be hot."  "Yes," said K., who until then had paid attention to
nothing but the painter's explanations, but now that he had had the heat
pointed out to him his brow began to sweat heavily.  "It's almost
unbearable."  The painter nodded as if he understood K.'s discomfort
very well.  "Could we not open the window?" asked K.  "No," said the
painter.  "It's only a fixed pane of glass, it can't be opened."  K. now
realised that all this time he had been hoping the painter would
suddenly go over to the window and pull it open.  He had prepared
himself even for the fog that he would breathe in through his open
mouth.  The thought that here he was entirely cut off from the air made
him feel dizzy.  He tapped lightly on the bedspread beside him and, with
a weak voice, said, "That is very inconvenient and unhealthy."  "Oh no,"
said the painter in defence of his window, "as it can't be opened this
room retains the heat better than if the window were double glazed, even
though it's only a single pane.  There's not much need to air the room
as there's so much ventilation through the gaps in the wood, but when I
do want to I can open one of my doors, or even both of them."  K. was
slightly consoled by this explanation and looked around to see where the
second door was.  The painter saw him do so and said, "It's behind you,
I had to hide it behind the bed."  Only then was K. able to see the
little door in the wall.  "It's really much too small for a studio
here," said the painter, as if he wanted to anticipate an objection K.
would make.  "I had to arrange things as well as I could.  That's
obviously a very bad place for the bed, in front of the door.  For
instance when the judge I'm painting at present comes he always comes
through the door by the bed, and I've even given him a key to this door
so that he can wait for me here in the studio when I'm not home.
Although nowadays he usually comes early in the morning when I'm still
asleep.  And of course, it always wakes me up when I hear the door
opened beside the bed, however fast asleep I am.  If you could hear the
way I curse him as he climbs over my bed in the morning you'd lose all
respect for judges.  I suppose I could take the key away from him but
that'd only make things worse.  It only takes a tiny effort to break any
of the doors here off their hinges."  All the time the painter was
speaking, K. was considering whether he should take off his coat, but he
finally realised that, if he didn't do so, he would be quite unable to
stay here any longer, so he took off his frock coat and lay it on his
knee so that he could put it back on again as soon as the conversation
was over.  He had hardly done this when one of the girls called out,
"Now he's taken his coat off!" and they could all be heard pressing
around the gaps in the planks to see the spectacle for themselves.  "The
girls think I'm going to paint your portrait," said the painter, "and
that's why you're taking your coat off."  "I see," said K., only
slightly amused by this, as he felt little better than he had before
even though he now sat in his shirtsleeves.  With some irritation he
asked, "What did you say the two other possibilities were?"  He had
already forgotten the terms used.  "Apparent acquittal and deferment,"
said the painter.  "It's up to you which one you choose.  You can get
either of them if I help you, but it'll take some effort of course, the
difference between them is that apparent acquittal needs concentrated
effort for a while and that deferment takes much less effort but it has
to be sustained.  Now then, apparent acquittal.  If that's what you want
I'll write down an assertion of your innocence on a piece of paper.  The
text for an assertion of this sort was passed down to me from my father
and it's quite unassailable.  I take this assertion round to the judges
I know.  So I'll start off with the one I'm currently painting, and put
the assertion to him when he comes for his sitting this evening.  I'll
lay the assertion in front of him, explain that you're innocent and give
him my personal guarantee of it.  And that's not just a superficial
guarantee, it's a real one and it's binding."  The painter's eyes seemed
to show some reproach of K. for wanting to impose that sort of
responsibility on him.  "That would be very kind of you", said K.  "And
would the judge then believe you and nonetheless not pass an absolute
acquittal?"  "It's like I just said," answered the painter.  "And
anyway, it's not entirely sure that all the judges would believe me,
many of them, for instance, might want me to bring you to see them
personally.  So then you'd have to come along too.  But at least then,
if that happens, the matter is half way won, especially as I'd teach you
in advance exactly how you'd need to act with the judge concerned, of
course.  What also happens, though, is that there are some judges who'll
turn me down in advance, and that's worse.  I'll certainly make several
attempts, but still, we'll have to forget about them, but at least we
can afford to do that as no one judge can pass the decisive verdict.
Then when I've got enough judges' signatures on this document I take it
to the judge who's concerned with your case.  I might even have his
signature already, in which case things develop a bit quicker than they
would do otherwise.  But there aren't usually many hold ups from then
on, and that's the time that the defendant can feel most confident.
It's odd, but true, that people feel more confidence in this time than
they do after they've been acquitted.  There's no particular exertion
needed now.  When he has the document asserting the defendant's
innocence, guaranteed by a number of other judges, the judge can acquit
you without any worries, and although there are still several
formalities to be gone through there's no doubt that that's what he'll
do as a favour to me and several other acquaintances.  You, however,
walk out the court and you're free."  "So, then I'll be free," said K.,
hesitantly.  "That's right," said the painter, "but only apparently free
or, to put it a better way, temporarily free, as the most junior judges,
the ones I know, they don't have the right to give the final acquittal.
Only the highest judge can do that, in the court that's quite out of reach
for you, for me and for all of us.  We don't know how things look there
and, incidentally, we don't want to know.   The right to acquit people
is a major privilege and our judges don't have it, but they do have the
right to free people from the indictment.  That's to say, if they're
freed in this way then for the time being the charge is withdrawn but
it's still hanging over their heads and it only takes an order from
higher up to bring it back into force.  And as I'm in such good contact
with the court I can also tell you how the difference between absolute
and apparent acquittal is described, just in a superficial way, in the
directives to the court offices.  If there's an absolute acquittal all
proceedings should stop, everything disappears from the process, not
just the indictment but the trial and even the acquittal disappears,
everything just disappears.  With an apparent acquittal it's different.
When that happens, nothing has changed except that the case for your
innocence, for your acquittal and the grounds for the acquittal have
been made stronger.  Apart from that, proceedings go on as before, the
court offices continue their business and the case gets passed to higher
courts, gets passed back down to the lower courts and so on, backwards
and forwards, sometimes faster, sometimes slower, to and fro.  It's
impossible to know exactly what's happening while this is going on.
Seen from outside it can sometimes seem that everything has been long
since forgotten, the documents have been lost and the acquittal is
complete.  No-one familiar with the court would believe it.  No
documents ever get lost, the court forgets nothing.   One day - no-one
expects it - some judge or other picks up the documents and looks more
closely at them, he notices that this particular case is still active,
and orders the defendant's immediate arrest.  I've been talking here as
if there's a long delay between apparent acquittal and re-arrest, that
is quite possible and I do know of cases like that, but it's just as
likely that the defendant goes home after he's been acquitted and finds
somebody there waiting to re-arrest him.  Then, of course, his life as a
free man is at an end."  "And does the trial start over again?" asked
K., finding it hard to believe.  "The trial will always start over
again," said the painter, "but there is, once again as before, the
possibility of getting an apparent acquittal.  Once again, the accused
has to muster all his strength and mustn't give up."  The painter said
that last phrase possibly as a result of the impression that K., whose
shoulders had dropped somewhat, gave on him.  "But to get a second
acquittal," asked K., as if in anticipation of further revelations by
the painter, "is that not harder to get than the first time?"  "As far
as that's concerned," answered the painter, "there's nothing you can say
for certain.  You mean, do you, that the second arrest would have an
adverse influence on the judge and the verdict he passes on the
defendant?  That's not how it happens.  When the acquittal is passed the
judges are already aware that re-arrest is likely.  So when it happens
it has hardly any effect.  But there are countless other reasons why the
judges' mood and their legal acumen in the case can be altered, and
efforts to obtain the second acquittal must therefore be suited to the
new conditions, and generally just as vigorous as the first."  "But this
second acquittal will once again not be final," said K., shaking his
head.  "Of course not," said the painter, "the second acquittal is
followed by the third arrest, the third acquittal by the fourth arrest
and so on.  That's what is meant by the term apparent acquittal."  K.
was silent.  "You clearly don't think an apparent acquittal offers much
advantage," said the painter, "perhaps deferment would suit you better.
Would you like me to explain what deferment is about?"  K. nodded.  The
painter had leant back and spread himself out in his chair, his
nightshirt was wide open, he had pushed his hand inside and was stroking
his breast and his sides.  "Deferment," said the painter, looking
vaguely in front of himself for a while as if trying to find a perfectly
appropriate explanation, "deferment consists of keeping proceedings
permanently in their earliest stages.  To do that, the accused and those
helping him need to keep in continuous personal contact with the court,
especially those helping him.  I repeat, this doesn't require so much
effort as getting an apparent acquittal, but it probably requires a lot
more attention.  You must never let the trial out of your sight, you
have to go and see the appropriate judge at regular intervals as well as
when something in particular comes up and, whatever you do, you have to
try and remain friendly with him; if you don't know the judge personally
you have to influence him through the judges you do know, and you have
to do it without giving up on the direct discussions.  As long as you
don't fail to do any of these things you can be reasonably sure the
trial won't get past its first stages.  The trial doesn't stop, but the
defendant is almost as certain of avoiding conviction as if he'd been
acquitted.  Compared with an apparent acquittal, deferment has the
advantage that the defendant's future is less uncertain, he's safe from
the shock of being suddenly re-arrested and doesn't need to fear the
exertions and stress involved in getting an apparent acquittal just when
everything else in his life would make it most difficult.  Deferment
does have certain disadvantages of its own though, too, and they
shouldn't be under-estimated.  I don't mean by this that the defendant
is never free, he's never free in the proper sense of the word with an
apparent acquittal either.  There's another disadvantage.  Proceedings
can't be prevented from moving forward unless there are some at least
ostensible reasons given.  So something needs to seem to be happening
when looked at from the outside.  This means that from time to time
various injunctions have to be obeyed, the accused has to be questioned,
investigations have to take place and so on.  The trial's been
artificially constrained inside a tiny circle, and it has to be
continuously spun round within it.  And that, of course, brings with it
certain unpleasantnesses for the accused, although you shouldn't imagine
they're all that bad.  All of this is just for show, the interrogations,
for instance, they're only very short, if you ever don't have the time
or don't feel like going to them you can offer an excuse, with some
judges you can even arrange the injunctions together a long time in
advance, in essence all it means is that, as the accused, you have to
report to the judge from time to time."  Even while the painter was
speaking those last words K. had laid his coat over his arm and had
stood up.  Immediately, from outside the door, there was a cry of  'He's
standing up now!'.  "Are you leaving already?" asked the painter, who
had also stood up.  "It must be the air that's driving you out.  I'm
very sorry about that.  There's still a lot I need to tell you.  I had
to put everything very briefly but I hope at least it was all clear."
"Oh yes," said K., whose head was aching from the effort of listening.
Despite this affirmation the painter summed it all up once more, as if
he wanted to give K. something to console him on his way home.  "Both
have in common that they prevent the defendant being convicted," he
said.  "But they also prevent his being properly acquitted," said K.
quietly, as if ashamed to acknowledge it. "You've got it, in essence,"
said the painter quickly.  K. placed his hand on his winter overcoat but
could not bring himself to put it on.  Most of all he would have liked
to pack everything together and run out to the fresh air.  Not even the
girls could induce him to put his coat on, even though they were already
loudly telling each other that he was doing so.  The painter still had
to interpret K.'s mood in some way, so he said, "I expect you've
deliberately avoided deciding between my suggestions yet.  That's good.
I would even have advised against making a decision straight away.
There's no more than a hair's breadth of difference between the
advantages and disadvantages.  Everything has to be carefully weighed
up.  But the most important thing is you shouldn't lose too much time."
"I'll come back here again soon," said K., who had suddenly decided to
put his frock coat on, threw his overcoat over his shoulder and hurried
over to the door behind which the girls now began to scream.  K. thought
he could even see the screaming girls through the door.  "Well, you'll
have to keep your word," said the painter, who had not followed him,
"otherwise I'll come to the bank to ask about it myself."  "Will you open
this door for me," said K. pulling at the handle which, as he noticed
from the resistance, was being held tightly by the girls on the other
side.  "Do you want to be bothered by the girls?" asked the painter.
"It's better if you use the other way out," he said, pointing to the
door behind the bed.  K. agreed to this and jumped back to the bed.  But
instead of opening that door the painter crawled under the bed and from
underneath it asked K., "Just a moment more, would you not like to see a
picture I could sell to you?"  K. did not want to be impolite, the
painter really had taken his side and promised to help him more in the
future, and because of K.'s forgetfulness there had been no mention of
any payment for the painter's help, so K. could not turn him down now
and allowed him to show him the picture, even though he was quivering
with impatience to get out of the studio.  From under the bed, the
painter withdrew a pile of unframed paintings.  They were so covered in
dust that when the painter tried to blow it off the one on top the dust
swirled around in front of K.'s eyes, robbing him of breath for some
time.  "Moorland landscape," said the painter passing the picture to K.
It showed two sickly trees, well separated from each other in dark
grass.  In the background there was a multi-coloured sunset.  "That's
nice," said K.  "I'll buy it."  K. expressed himself in this curt way
without any thought, so he was glad when the painter did not take this
amiss and picked up a second painting from the floor.  "This is a
counterpart to the first picture," said the painter.  Perhaps it had
been intended as a counterpart, but there was not the slightest
difference to be seen between it and the first picture, there were the
trees, there the grass and there the sunset.  But this was of little
importance to K.  "They are beautiful landscapes," he said, "I'll buy
them both and hang them in my office."  "You seem to like this subject,"
said the painter, picking up a third painting, "good job I've still got
another, similar picture here."  The picture though, was not similar,
rather it was exactly the same moorland landscape.  The painter was
fully exploiting this opportunity to sell off his old pictures.  "I'll
take this one too," said K.  "How much do the three paintings cost?"
"We can talk about that next time," said the painter.  "You're in a
hurry now, and we'll still be in contact.  And besides, I'm glad you
like the paintings, I'll give you all the paintings I've got down here.
They're all moorland landscapes, I've painted a lot of moorland
landscapes.  A lot of people don't like that sort of picture because
they're too gloomy, but there are others, and you're one of them, who
love gloomy themes."  But K. was not in the mood to hear about the
professional experiences of this painter cum beggar.  "Wrap them all
up!" he called out, interrupting the painter as he was speaking, "my
servant will come to fetch them in the morning."  "There's no need for
that," said the painter.  "I expect I can find a porter for you who can
go with you now."  And, at last, he leant over the bed and unlocked the
door.  "Just step on the bed, don't worry about that," said the painter,
"that's what everyone does who comes in here."  Even without this
invitation, K. had shown no compunction in already placing his foot in
the middle of the bed covers, then he looked out through the open door
and drew his foot back again.  "What is that?" he asked the painter.
"What are you so surprised at?" he asked, surprised in his turn.  "Those
are court offices.  Didn't you know there are court offices here?  There
are court offices in almost every attic, why should this building be any
different?  Even my studio is actually one of the court offices but the
court put it at my disposal."  It was not so much finding court offices
even here that shocked K., he was mainly shocked at himself, at his own
naïvety in court matters.  It seemed to him that one of the most basic
rules governing how a defendant should behave was always to be prepared,
never allow surprises, never to look, unsuspecting, to the right when
the judge stood beside him to his left - and this was the very basic
rule that he was continually violating.  A long corridor extended in
front of him, air blew in from it which, compared with the air in the
studio, was refreshing.  There were benches set along each side of the
corridor just as in the waiting area for the office he went to himself.
There seemed to be precise rules governing how offices should be
equipped.   There did not seem to be many people visiting the offices
that day.  There was a man there, half sitting, half laying, his face
was buried in his arm on the bench and he seemed to be sleeping; another
man was standing in the half-dark at the end of the corridor.  K. now
climbed over the bed, the painter followed him with the pictures.  They
soon came across a servant of the court - K. was now able to recognise
all the servants of the court from the gold buttons they wore on their
civilian clothes below the normal buttons - and the painter instructed
him to go with K. carrying the pictures.  K. staggered more than he
walked, his handkerchief pressed over his mouth.  They had nearly
reached the exit when the girls stormed in on them, so K. had not been
able to avoid them.  They had clearly seen that the second door of the
studio had been opened and had gone around to impose themselves on him
from this side.  "I can't come with you any further!" called out the
painter with a laugh as the girls pressed in.  "Goodbye, and don't
hesitate too long!"  K. did not even look round at him.  Once on the
street he took the first cab he came across.  He now had to get rid of
the servant, whose gold button continually caught his eye even if it
caught no-one else's.  As a servant, the servant of the court was going
to sit on the coach-box.  But K. chased him down from there.  It was
already well into the afternoon when K. arrived in front of the bank.
He would have liked to leave the pictures in the cab but feared there
might be some occasion when he would have to let the painter see he
still had them.  So he had the pictures taken to his office and locked
them in the lowest drawer of his desk so that he could at least keep
them safe from the deputy director's view for the next few days.




Chapter Eight
 Block, the businessman  - Dismissing the lawyer

        K. had at last made the decision to withdraw his defence from the
lawyer.   It was impossible to remove his doubts as to whether this was
the right decision, but this was outweighed by his belief in its
necessity.  This decision, on the day he intended to go to see the
lawyer, took a lot of the strength he needed for his work, he worked
exceptionally slowly, he had to remain in his office a long time, and it
was already past ten o'clock when he finally stood in front of the
lawyer's front door.  Even before he rang he considered whether it might
not be better to give the lawyer notice by letter or telephone, a
personal conversation would certainly be very difficult.  Nonetheless,
K. did not actually want to do without it, if he gave notice by any
other means it would be received in silence or with a few formulated
words, and unless Leni could discover anything K. would never learn how
the lawyer had taken his dismissal and what its consequences might be,
in the lawyer's not unimportant opinion.  But sitting in front of him
and taken by surprise by his dismissal, K. would be able easily to infer
everything he wanted from the lawyer's face and behaviour, even if he
could not be induced to say very much.  It was not even out of the
question that K. might, after all, be persuaded that it would be best to
leave his defence to the lawyer and withdraw his dismissal.

        As usual, there was at first no response to K.'s ring at the door.
"Leni could be a bit quicker," thought K.  But he could at least be glad
there was nobody else interfering as usually happened, be it the man in
his nightshirt or anyone else who might bother him.  As K. pressed on
the button for the second time he looked back at the other door, but
this time it, too, remained closed.  At last, two eyes appeared at the
spy-hatch in the lawyer's door, although they weren't Leni's eyes.
Someone unlocked the door, but kept himself pressed against it as he
called back inside, "It's him!", and only then did he open the door
properly.  K. pushed against the door, as behind him he could already
hear the key being hurriedly turned in the lock of the door to the other
flat.  When the door in front of him finally opened, he stormed straight
into the hallway.  Through the corridor which led between the rooms he
saw Leni, to whom the warning cry of the door opener had been directed,
still running away in her nightshirt.  He looked at her for a moment
and then looked round at the person who had opened the door.  It was a
small, wizened man with a full beard, he held a candle in his hand.  "Do
you work here?" asked K.  "No," answered the man, "I don't belong here
at all, the lawyer is only representing me, I'm here on legal business."
"Without your coat?" asked K., indicating the man's deficiency of dress
with a gesture of his hand.  "Oh, do forgive me!" said the man, and he
looked at himself in the light of the candle he was holding as if he had
not known about his appearance until then.
"Is Leni your lover?" asked K. curtly.  He had set his legs slightly
apart, his hands, in which he held his hat, were behind his back.
Merely by being in possession of a thick overcoat he felt his advantage
over this thin little man.  "Oh God," he said and, shocked, raised one
hand in front of his face as if in defence, "no, no, what can you be
thinking?"  "You look honest enough," said K. with a smile, "but come
along anyway."  K. indicated with his hat which way the man was to go
and let him go ahead of him.  "What is your name then?" asked K. on the
way.  "Block.  I'm a businessman," said the small man, twisting himself
round as he thus introduced himself, although K. did not allow him to
stop moving.  "Is that your real name?" asked K.  "Of course it is," was
the man's reply, "why do you doubt it?"  "I thought you might have some
reason to keep your name secret," said K.  He felt himself as much at
liberty as is normally only felt in foreign parts when speaking with
people of lower standing, keeping everything about himself to himself,
speaking only casually about the interests of the other, able to raise
him to a level above one's own, but also able, at will, to let him drop
again.  K. stopped at the door of the lawyer's office, opened it and, to
the businessman who had obediently gone ahead, called, "Not so fast!
Bring some light here!"  K. thought Leni might have hidden in here, he
let the businessman search in every corner, but the room was empty.  In
front of the picture of the judge K. took hold of the businessman's
braces to stop him moving on.  "Do you know him?" he asked, pointing
upwards with his finger.  The businessman lifted the candle, blinked as
he looked up and said, "It's a judge."  "An important judge?" asked K.,
and stood to the side and in front of the businessman so that he could
observe what impression the picture had on him.  The businessman was
looking up in admiration.  "He's an important judge."  "You don't have
much insight," said K.  "He is the lowest of the lowest examining
judges."  "I remember now," said the businessman as he lowered the
candle, "that's what I've already been told."  "Well of course you
have," called out K., "I'd forgotten about it, of course you would
already have been told."  "But why, why?" asked the businessman as he
moved forwards towards the door, propelled by the hands of K.  Outside
in the corridor K. said,
"You know where Leni's hidden, do you?"  "Hidden?" said the businessman,
"No, but she might be in the kitchen cooking soup for the lawyer."  "Why
didn't you say that immediately?" asked K.  "I was going to take you
there, but you called me back again," answered the businessman, as if
confused by the contradictory commands.  "You think you're very clever,
don't you," said K, "now take me there!"  K. had never been in the
kitchen, it was surprisingly big and very well equipped.  The stove
alone was three times bigger than normal stoves, but it was not possible
to see any detail beyond this as the kitchen was at the time illuminated
by no more than a small lamp hanging by the entrance.  At the stove
stood Leni, in a white apron as always, breaking eggs into a pot
standing on a spirit lamp.
"Good evening, Josef," she said with a glance sideways.  "Good evening,"
said K., pointing with one hand to a chair in a corner which the
businessman was to sit on, and he did indeed sit down on it.  K. however
went very close behind Leni's back, leant over her shoulder and asked,
"Who is this man?"  Leni put one hand around K. as she stirred the soup
with the other, she drew him forward toward herself and said, "He's a
pitiful character, a poor businessman by the name of Block.  Just look
at him."  The two of them looked back over their shoulders.  The
businessman was sitting on the chair that K. had directed him to, he had
extinguished the candle whose light was no longer needed and pressed on
the wick with his fingers to stop the smoke.  "You were in your
nightshirt," said K., putting his hand on her head and turning it back
towards the stove.  She was silent.  "Is he your lover?" asked K.  She
was about to take hold of the pot of soup, but K. took both her hands
and said, "Answer me!"  She said, "Come into the office, I'll explain
everything to you."  "No," said K., "I want you to explain it here."
She put her arms around him and wanted to kiss him.  K., though, pushed
her away and said, "I don't want you to kiss me now."  "Josef," said
Leni, looking at K. imploringly but frankly in the eyes, "you're not
going to be jealous of Mr. Block now, are you?  Rudi," she then said,
turning to the businessman, "help me out will you, I'm being suspected
of something, you can see that, leave the candle alone."  It had looked
as though Mr. Block had not been paying attention but he had been
following closely.  "I don't even know why you might be jealous," he
said ingenuously.  "Nor do I, actually," said K., looking at the
businessman with a smile.  Leni laughed out loud and while K. was not
paying attention took the opportunity of embracing him and whispering,
"Leave him alone, now, you can see what sort of person he is.  I've been
helping him a little bit because he's an important client of the
lawyer's, and no other reason.  And what about you?  Do you want to
speak to the lawyer at this time of day?  He's very unwell today, but if
you want I'll tell him you're here.  But you can certainly spend the
night with me.  It's so long since you were last here, even the lawyer
has been asking about you.  Don't neglect your case!  And I've got some
things to tell you that I've learned about.  But now, before anything
else, take your coat off!"  She helped him off with his coat, took the
hat off his head, ran with the things into the hallway to hang them up,
then she ran back and saw to the soup.  "Do you want me to tell him
you're here straight away or take him his soup first?"  "Tell him I'm
here first," said K.  He was in a bad mood, he had originally intended a
detailed discussion of his business with Leni, especially the question
of his giving the lawyer notice, but now he no longer wanted to because
of the presence of the businessman.  Now he considered his affair too
important to let this little businessman take part in it and perhaps
change some of his decisions, and so
he called Leni back even though she was already on her way to the
lawyer.  "Bring him his soup first," he said, "I want him to get his
strength up for the discussion with me, he'll need it."  "You're a
client of the lawyer's too, aren't you," said the businessman quietly
from his corner as if he were trying to find this out.  It was not,
however, taken well.  "What business is that of yours?" said K., and
Leni said,
"Will you be quiet. - I'll take him his soup first then, shall I?" And
she poured the soup into a dish. "The only worry then is that he might
go to sleep soon after he's eaten."  "What I've got to say to him will
keep him awake," said K., who still wanted to intimate that he intended
some important negotiations with the lawyer, he wanted Leni to ask him
what it was and only then to ask her advice.  But instead, she just
promptly carried out the order he had given her.  When she went over to
him with the dish she deliberately brushed against him and whispered,
"I'll tell him you're here as soon as he's eaten the soup so that I can
get you back as soon as possible."  "Just go," said K., "just go."  "Be
a bit more friendly," she said and, still holding the dish, turned
completely round once more in the doorway.

        K. watched her as she went; the decision had finally been made
that the lawyer was to be dismissed, it was probably better that he had
not been able to discuss the matter any more with Leni beforehand; she
hardly understood the complexity of the matter, she would certainly have
advised him against it and perhaps would even have prevented him from
dismissing the lawyer this time, he would have remained in doubt and
unease and eventually have carried out his decision after a while anyway
as this decision was something he could not avoid.  The sooner it was
carried out the more harm would be avoided.  And moreover, perhaps the
businessman had something to say on the matter.

        K. turned round, the businessman hardly noticed it as he was about
to stand up.  "Stay where you are," said K. and pulled up a chair beside
him.  "Have you been a client of the lawyer's for a long time?" asked K.
"Yes," said the businessman, "a very long time."  "How many years has he
been representing you so far, then?" asked K.  "I don't know how you
mean," said the businessman, "he's been my business lawyer - I buy and
sell cereals - he's been my business lawyer since I took the business
over, and that's about twenty years now, but perhaps you mean my own
trial and he's been representing me in that since it started, and that's
been more than five years.  Yes, well over five years," he then added,
pulling out an old briefcase, "I've got everything written down; I can
tell you the exact dates if you like.  It's so hard to remember
everything.  Probably, my trial's been going on much longer than that,
it started soon after the death of my wife, and that's been more than
five and a half years now."  K. moved in closer to him.  "So the lawyer
takes on ordinary legal business, does he?" he asked.  This combination
of criminal and commercial business seemed surprisingly reassuring for
K.  "Oh yes," said the businessman, and then he whispered,  "They even
say he's more efficient in jurisprudence than he is in other matters."
But then he seemed to regret saying this, and he laid a hand on K.'s
shoulder and said, "Please don't betray me to him, will you."  K. patted
his thigh to reassure him and said, "No, I don't betray people."  "He
can be so vindictive, you see," said the businessman.
"I'm sure he won't do anything against such a faithful client as you,"
said K.  "Oh, he might do," said the businessman, "when he gets cross it
doesn't matter who it is, and anyway, I'm not really faithful to him."
"How's that then?" asked K.  "I'm not sure I should tell you about it,"
said the businessman hesitantly.  "I think it'll be alright," said K.
"Well then," said the businessman, "I'll tell you about some of it, but
you'll have to tell me a secret too, then we can support each other with
the lawyer."  "You are very careful," said K., "but I'll tell you a
secret that will set your mind completely at ease.  Now tell me, in what
way have you been unfaithful to the lawyer?"  "I've ..." said the
businessman hesitantly, and in a tone as if he were confessing something
dishonourable, "I've taken on other lawyers besides him."  "That's not
so serious," said K., a little disappointed.  "It is, here," said the
businessman, who had had some difficulty breathing since making his
confession but who now, after hearing K.'s comment, began to feel more
trust for him.  "That's not allowed.  And it's allowed least of all to
take on petty lawyers when you've already got a proper one.  And that's
just what I have done, besides him I've got five petty lawyers."
"Five!" exclaimed K., astonished at this number, "Five lawyers besides
this one?"  The businessman nodded.  "I'm even negotiating with a sixth
one."  "But why do you need so many lawyers?" asked K.  "I need all of
them," said the businessman.  "Would you mind explaining that to me?"
asked K.  "I'd be glad to," said the businessman.  "Most of all, I don't
want to lose my case, well that's obvious.  So that means I mustn't
neglect anything that might be of use to me; even if there's very little
hope of a particular thing being of any use I can't just throw it away.
So everything I have I've put to use in my case.  I've taken all the
money out of my business, for example, the offices for my business used
to occupy nearly a whole floor, but now all I need is a little room at
the back where I work with one apprentice.  It wasn't just using up the
money that caused the difficulty, of course, it was much more to do with
me not working at the business as much as I used to.  If you want to do
something about your trial you don't have much time for anything else."
"So you're also working at the court yourself?" asked K.  "That's just
what I want to learn more about."  "I can't tell you very much about
that," said the businessman, "at first I tried to do that too but I soon
had to give it up again.  It wears you out too much, and it's really not
much use.  And it turned out to be quite impossible to work there
yourself and to negotiate, at least for me it was.  It's a heavy strain
there just sitting and waiting.  You know yourself what the air is like
in those offices."  "How do you know I've been there, then?" asked K.
"I was in the waiting room myself when you went through."  "What a
coincidence that is!" exclaimed K., totally engrossed and forgetting how
ridiculous the businessman had seemed to him earlier.  "So you saw me!
You were in the waiting room when I went through.  Yes, I did go through
it one time."  "It isn't such a big coincidence," said the businessman,
"I'm there nearly every day."  "I expect I'll have to go there quite
often myself now," said K., "although I can hardly expect to be shown
the same respect as I was then.  They all stood up for me.  They must
have thought I was a judge."  "No," said the businessman, "we were
greeting the servant of the court.  We knew you were a defendant.  That
sort of news spreads very quickly."  "So you already knew about that,"
said K., "the way I behaved must have seemed very arrogant to you.  Did
you criticise me for it afterwards?"  "No," said the businessman, "quite
the opposite.  That was just stupidity."  "What do you mean,
'stupidity'?" asked K.  "Why are you asking about it?" said the
businessman in some irritation.  "You still don't seem to know the
people there and you might take it wrong.  Don't forget in proceedings
like this there are always lots of different things coming up to talk
about, things that you just can't understand with reason alone, you just
get too tired and distracted for most things and so, instead, people
rely on superstition.  I'm talking about the others, but I'm no better
myself.  One of these superstitions, for example, is that you can learn
a lot about the outcome of a defendant's case by looking at his face,
especially the shape of his lips.  There are lots who believe that, and
they said they could see from the shape of your lips that you'd
definitely be found guilty very soon.  I repeat that all this is just a
ridiculous superstition, and in most cases it's completely disproved by
the facts, but when you live in that society it's hard to hold yourself
back from beliefs like that.  Just think how much effect that
superstition can have.  You spoke to one of them there, didn't you?  He
was hardly able to give you an answer.  There are lots of things there
that can make you confused, of course, but one of them, for him, was the
appearance of your lips.  He told us all later he thought he could see
something in your lips that meant he'd be convicted himself."  "On my
lips?" asked K., pulling out a pocket mirror and examining himself.  "I
can see nothing special about my lips.  Can you?"  "Nor can I," said the
businessman, "nothing at all."  "These people are so superstitious!"
exclaimed K.  "Isn't that what I just told you?" asked the businessman.
"Do you then have that much contact with each other, exchanging each
other's opinions?" said K.  "I've kept myself completely apart so far."
"They don't normally have much contact with each other," said the
businessman, "that would be impossible, there are so many of them.  And
they don't have much in common either.  If a group of them ever thinks
they have found something in common it soon turns out they were
mistaken.  There's nothing you can do as a group where the court's
concerned.  Each case is examined separately, the court is very
painstaking.  So there's nothing to be achieved by forming into a group,
only sometimes an individual will achieve something in secret; and it's
only when that's been done the others learn about it; nobody knows how
it was done.  So there's no sense of togetherness, you meet people now
and then in the waiting rooms, but we don't talk much there.  The
superstitious beliefs were established a long time ago and they spread
all by themselves."  "I saw those gentlemen in the waiting room," said
K., "it seemed so pointless for them to be waiting in that way."
"Waiting is not pointless," said the businessman, "it's only pointless
if you try and interfere yourself.  I told you just now I've got five
lawyers besides this one.  You might think - I thought it myself at
first - you might think I could leave the whole thing entirely up to
them now.  That would be entirely wrong.  I can leave it up to them less
than when I had just the one.  Maybe you don't understand that, do you?"
"No," said K., and to slow the businessman down, who had been speaking
too fast, he laid his hand on the businessman's to reassure him, "but
I'd like just to ask you to speak a little more slowly, these are many
very important things for me, and I can't follow exactly what you're
saying."  "You're quite right to remind me of that," said the
businessman, "you're new to all this, a junior.  Your trial is six
months old, isn't it?  Yes, I've heard about it.  Such a new case!  But
I've already thought all these things through countless times, to me
they're the most obvious things in the world."  "You must be glad your
trial has already progressed so far, are you?" asked K., he did not wish
to ask directly how the businessman's affairs stood, but received no
clear answer anyway.  "Yes, I've been working at my trial for five years
now," said the businessman as his head sank, "that's no small
achievement."  Then he was silent for a while.  K. listened to hear
whether Leni was on her way back.  On the one hand he did not want her
to come back too soon as he still had many questions to ask and did not
want her to find him in this intimate discussion with the businessman,
but on the other hand it irritated him that she stayed so long with the
lawyer when K. was there, much longer than she needed to give him his
soup.  "I still remember it exactly," the businessman began again, and
K. immediately gave him his full attention, "when my case was as old as
yours is now.  I only had this one lawyer at that time but I wasn't very
satisfied with him."  Now I'll find out everything, thought K., nodding
vigorously as if he could thereby encourage the businessman to say
everything worth knowing.  "My case," the businessman continued, "didn't
move on at all, there were some hearings that took place and I went to
every one of them, collected materials, handed all my business books to
the court - which I later found was entirely  unnecessary - I ran back
and forth to the lawyer, and he submitted various documents to the court
too ..."  "Various documents?" asked K.  "Yes, that's right," said the
businessman.  "That's very important for me," said K., "in my case he's
still working on the first set of documents.  He still hasn't done
anything.  I see now that he's been neglecting me quite disgracefully."
"There can be lots of good reasons why the first documents still aren't
ready," said the businessman, "and anyway, it turned out later on that
the ones he submitted for me were entirely worthless.  I even read one
of them myself, one of the officials at the court was very helpful.  It
was very learned, but it didn't actually say anything.  Most of all,
there was lots of Latin, which I can't understand, then pages and pages
of general appeals to the court, then lots of flattery for particular
officials, they weren't named, these officials, but anyone familiar with
the court must have been able to guess who they were, then there was
self-praise by the lawyer where he humiliated himself to the court in a
way that was downright dog-like, and then endless investigations of
cases from the past which were supposed to be similar to mine.
Although, as far as I was able to follow them, these investigations had
been carried out very carefully.  Now, I don't mean to criticise the
lawyer's work with all of this, and the document I read was only one of
many, but even so, and this is something I will say, at that time I
couldn't see any progress in my trial at all."  "And what sort of
progress had you been hoping for?" asked K.  "That's a very sensible
question," said the businessman with a smile, "it's only very rare that
you see any progress in these proceedings at all.  But I didn't know
that then.  I'm a businessman, much more in those days than now, I
wanted to see some tangible progress, it should have all been moving to
some conclusion or at least should have been moving on in some way
according to the rules.  Instead of which there were just more hearings,
and most of them went through the same things anyway; I had all the
answers off pat like in a church service; there were messengers from the
court coming to me at work several times a week, or they came to me at
home or anywhere else they could find me; and that was very disturbing
of course (but at least now things are better in that respect, it's much
less disturbing when they contact you by telephone), and rumours about
my trial even started to spread among some of the people I do business
with, and especially my relations, so I was being made to suffer in many
different ways but there was still not the slightest sign that even the
first hearing would take place soon.  So I went to the lawyer and
complained about it.  He explained it all to me at length, but refused
to do anything I asked for, no-one has any influence on the way the
trial proceeds, he said, to try and insist on it in any of the documents
submitted - like I was asking - was simply unheard of and would do harm
to both him and me.  I thought to myself: What this lawyer can't or
won't do another lawyer will.  So I looked round for other lawyers.  And
before you say anything: none of them asked for a definite date for the
main trial and none of them got one, and anyway, apart from one
exception which I'll talk about in a minute, it really is impossible,
that's one thing this lawyer didn't mislead me about; but besides, I had
no reason to regret turning to other lawyers.  Perhaps you've already
heard how Dr. Huld talks about the petty lawyers, he probably made them
sound very contemptible to you, and he's right, they are contemptible.
But when he talks about them and compares them with himself and his
colleagues there's a small error running through what he says, and, just
for your interest, I'll tell you about it.  When he talks about the
lawyers he mixes with he sets them apart by calling them the 'great
lawyers'.  That's wrong, anyone can call himself 'great' if he wants to,
of course, but in this case only the usage of the court can make that
distinction.  You see, the court says that besides the petty lawyers
there are also minor lawyers and great lawyers.  This one and his
colleagues are only minor lawyers, and the difference in rank between
them and the great lawyers, who I've only ever heard about and never
seen, is incomparably greater than between the minor lawyers and the
despised petty lawyers."  "The great lawyers?" asked K.  "Who are they
then?  How do you contact them?"  "You've never heard about them, then?"
said the businessman.  "There's hardly anyone who's been accused who
doesn't spend a lot of time dreaming about the great lawyers once he's
heard about them.  It's best if you don't let yourself be misled in that
way.  I don't know who the great lawyers are, and there's probably no
way of contacting them.  I don't know of any case I can talk about with
certainty where they've taken any part.  They do defend a lot of people,
but you can't get hold of them by your own efforts, they only defend
those who they want to defend.  And I don't suppose they ever take on
cases that haven't already got past the lower courts.  Anyway, it's best
not to think about them, as if you do it makes the discussions with the
other lawyers, all their advice and all that they do manage to achieve,
seem so unpleasant and useless, I had that experience myself, just
wanted to throw everything away and lay at home in bed and hear nothing
more about it.  But that, of course, would be the stupidest thing you
could do, and you wouldn't be left in peace in bed for very long
either."  "So you weren't thinking about the great lawyers at that
time?" asked K.  "Not for very long," said the businessman, and smiled
again, "you can't forget about them entirely, I'm afraid, especially in
the night when these thoughts come so easily.  But I wanted immediate
results in those days, so I went to the petty lawyers."

        "Well look at you two sat huddled together!" called Leni as she
came back with the dish and stood in the doorway.  They were indeed sat
close together, if either of them turned his head even slightly it would
have knocked against the other's, the businessman was not only very
small but also sat hunched down, so that K. was also forced to bend down
low if he wanted to hear everything.  "Not quite yet!" called out K., to
turn Leni away, his hand, still resting on the businessman's hand,
twitching with impatience.  "He wanted me to tell him about my trial,"
said the businessman to Leni.  "Carry on, then, carry on," she said.
She spoke to the businessman with affection but, at the same time, with
condescension.  K. did not like that, he had begun to learn that the man
was of some value after all, he had experience at least, and he was
willing to share it.  Leni was probably wrong about him.  He watched her
in irritation as Leni now took the candle from the businessman's hand -
which he had been holding on to all this time - wiped his hand with her
apron and then knelt beside him to scratch off some wax that had dripped
from the candle onto his trousers.  "You were about to tell me about the
petty lawyers," said K., shoving Leni's hand away with no further
comment.  "What's wrong with you today?" asked Leni, tapped him gently
and carried on with what she had been doing.  "Yes, the petty lawyers,"
said the businessman, putting his hand to his brow as if thinking hard.
K. wanted to help him and said, "You wanted immediate results and so
went to the petty lawyers."
"Yes, that's right," said the businessman, but did not continue with
what he'd been saying.  "Maybe he doesn't want to speak about it in
front of Leni," thought K., suppressing his impatience to hear the rest
straight away, and stopped trying to press him.

        "Have you told him I'm here?" he asked Leni.  "Course I have," she
said, "he's waiting for you.  Leave Block alone now, you can talk to
Block later, he'll still be here."  K. still hesitated.  "You'll still
be here?" he asked the businessman, wanting to hear the answer from him
and not wanting Leni to speak about the businessman as if he weren't
there, he was full of secret resentment towards Leni today.  And once
more it was only Leni who answered.  "He often sleeps here."  "He sleeps
here?" exclaimed K., he had thought the businessman would just wait
there for him while he quickly settled his business with the lawyer, and
then they would leave together to discuss everything thoroughly and
undisturbed.  "Yes," said Leni, "not everyone's like you, Josef, allowed
to see the lawyer at any time you like.  Don't even seem surprised
that the lawyer, despite being ill, still receives you at eleven o'clock
at night.  You take it far too much for granted, what your friends do
for you.  Well, your friends, or at least I do, we like to do things for
you.  I don't want or need any more thanks than that you're fond of me."
"Fond of you?" thought K. at first, and only then it occurred to him,
"Well, yes, I am fond of her." Nonetheless, what he said, forgetting all
the rest, was, "He receives me because I am his client.  If I needed
anyone else's help I'd have to beg and show gratitude whenever I do
anything."  "He's really nasty today, isn't he?" Leni asked the
businessman.  "Now it's me who's not here," thought K., and nearly lost
his temper with the businessman when, with the same rudeness as Leni, he
said, "The lawyer also has other reasons to receive him.  His case is
much more interesting than mine.  And it's only in its early stages too,
it probably hasn't progressed very far so the lawyer still likes to deal
with him.  That'll all change later on."  "Yeah, yeah," said Leni,
looking at the businessman and laughing. "He doesn't half talk!" she
said, turning to face K.  "You can't believe a word he says.  He's as
talkative as he is sweet.  Maybe that's why the lawyer can't stand him.
At least, he only sees him when he's in the right mood.  I've already
tried hard to change that but it's impossible.  Just think, there are
times when I tell him Block's here and he doesn't receive him until
three days later.  And if Block isn't on the spot when he's called then
everything's lost and it all has to start all over again.  That's why I
let Block sleep here, it wouldn't be the first time Dr. Huld has wanted
to see him in the night.  So now Block is ready for that.   Sometimes,
when he knows Block is still here, he'll even change his mind about
letting him in to see him."  K. looked questioningly at the businessman.
The latter nodded and, although he had spoken quite openly with K.
earlier, seemed to be confused with shame as he said, "Yes, later on you
become very dependent on your lawyer."  "He's only pretending to mind,"
said Leni.  "He likes to sleep here really, he's often said so."  She
went over to a little door and shoved it open.  "Do you want to see his
bedroom?" she asked.  K. went over to the low, windowless room and
looked in from the doorway.  The room contained a narrow bed which
filled it completely, so that to get into the bed you would need to
climb over the bedpost.  At the head of the bed there was a niche in the
wall where, fastidiously tidy, stood a candle, a bottle of ink, and a
pen with a bundle of papers which were probably to do with the trial.
"You sleep in the maid's room?" asked K., as he went back to the
businessman.  "Leni's let me have it," answered the businessman, "it has
many advantages."  K. looked long at him; his first impression of the
businessman had perhaps not been right; he had experience as his trial
had already lasted a long time, but he had paid a heavy price for this
experience.  K. was suddenly unable to bear the sight of the businessman
any longer.  "Bring him to bed, then!" he called out to Leni, who seemed
to understand him.  For himself, he wanted to go to the lawyer and, by
dismissing him, free himself from not only the lawyer but also from Leni
and the businessman.  But before he had reached the door the businessman
spoke to him gently.  "Excuse me, sir," he said, and K. looked round
crossly.  "You've forgotten your promise," said the businessman,
stretching his hand out to K. imploringly from where he sat.  "You were
going to tell me a secret."  "That is true," said K., as he glanced at
Leni, who was watching him carefully, to check on her.  "So listen; it's
hardly a secret now anyway.  I'm going to see the lawyer now to sack
him."  "He's sacking him!" yelled the businessman, and he jumped up from
his chair and ran around the kitchen with his arms in the air.  He kept
on shouting, "He's sacking his lawyer!"  Leni tried to rush at K. but
the businessman got in her way so that she shoved him away with her
fists.  Then, still with her hands balled into fists, she ran after K.
who, however, had been given a long start.  He was already inside the
lawyer's room by the time Leni caught up with him.  He had almost closed
the door behind himself, but Leni held the door open with her foot,
grabbed his arm and tried to pull him back.  But he put such pressure on
her wrist that, with a sigh, she was forced to release him.  She did not
dare go into the room straight away, and K. locked the door with the
key.

        "I've been waiting for you a very long time," said the lawyer from
his bed.  He had been reading something by the light of a candle but now
he laid it onto the bedside table and put his glasses on, looking at K.
sharply through them.  Instead of apologising K. said, "I'll be leaving
again soon."  As he had not apologised the lawyer ignored what K. said,
and replied, "I won't let you in this late again next time."  "I find
that quite acceptable," said K.  The lawyer looked at him quizzically.
"Sit down," he said.  "As you wish," said K., drawing a chair up to the
bedside table and sitting down.
"It seemed to me that you locked the door," said the lawyer.  "Yes,"
said K., "it was because of Leni."  He had no intention of letting
anyone off lightly.  But the lawyer asked him, "Was she being
importunate again?"  "Importunate?" asked K.  "Yes," said the lawyer,
laughing as he did so, had a fit of coughing and then, once it had
passed, began to laugh again.  "I'm sure you must have noticed how
importunate she can be sometimes," he said, and patted K.'s hand which
K. had rested on the bedside table and which he now snatched back.  "You
don't attach much importance to it, then," said the lawyer when K. was
silent, "so much the better.  Otherwise I might have needed to apologise
to you.  It is a peculiarity of Leni's.  I've long since forgiven her
for it, and I wouldn't be talking of it now, if you hadn't locked the
door just now.  Anyway, perhaps I should at least explain this
peculiarity of hers to you, but you seem rather disturbed, the way
you're looking at me, and so that's why I'll do it, this peculiarity of
hers consists in this; Leni finds most of the accused attractive.  She
attaches herself to each of them, loves each of them, even seems to be
loved by each of them; then she sometimes entertains me by telling me
about them when I allow her to.  I am not so astonished by all of this
as you seem to be.  If you look at them in the right way the accused
really can be attractive, quite often.  But that is a remarkable and to
some extent scientific phenomenon.  Being indicted does not cause any
clear, precisely definable change in a person's appearance, of course.
But it's not like with other legal matters, most of them remain in their
usual way of life and, if they have a good lawyer looking after them,
the trial doesn't get in their way.  But there are nonetheless those who
have experience in these matters who can look at a crowd, however big,
and tell you which among them is facing a charge.  How can they do that,
you will ask.  My answer will not please you.  It is simply that those
who are facing a charge are the most attractive.  It cannot be their
guilt that makes them attractive as not all of them are guilty - at
least that's what I, as a lawyer, have to say - and nor can it be the
proper punishment that has made them attractive as not all of them are
punished, so it can only be that the proceedings levelled against them
take some kind of hold on them.  Whatever the reason, some of these
attractive people are indeed very attractive.  But all of them are
attractive, even Block, pitiful worm that he is."  As the lawyer
finished what he was saying, K. was fully in control of himself, he had
even nodded conspicuously at his last few words in order to confirm to
himself the view he had already formed; that the lawyer was trying to
confuse him, as he always did, by making general and irrelevant
observations, and thus distract him from the main question of what he
was actually doing for K.'s trial.  The lawyer must have noticed that K.
was offering him more resistance than before, as he became silent,
giving  K. the chance to speak himself, and then, as K. also remained
silent, he asked, "Did you have a particular reason for coming to see me
today?"  "Yes," said K., putting his hand up to slightly shade his eyes
from the light of the candle so that he could see the lawyer better, "I
wanted to tell you that I'm withdrawing my representation from you, with
immediate effect."  "Do I understand you rightly?" asked the lawyer as
he half raised himself in his bed and supported himself with one hand on
the pillow.  "I think you do," said K., sitting stiffly upright as if
waiting in ambush.  "Well we can certainly discuss this plan of yours,"
said the lawyer after a pause.  "It's not a plan any more," said K.
"That may be," said the lawyer, "but we still mustn't rush anything."
He used the word 'we', as if he had no intention of letting K. go free,
and as if, even if he could no longer represent him, he could still at
least continue as his adviser.  "Nothing is being rushed," said K.,
standing slowly up and going behind his chair, "everything has been well
thought out and probably even for too long.  The decision is final."
"Then allow me to say a few words," said the lawyer, throwing the bed
cover to one side and sitting on the edge of the bed.  His naked, white-
haired legs shivered in the cold.  He asked K. to pass him a blanket
from the couch.  K. passed him the blanket and said, "You are running
the risk of catching cold for no reason."  "The circumstances are
important enough," said the lawyer as he wrapped the bed cover around
the top half of his body and then the blanket around his legs.  "Your
uncle is my friend and in the course of time I've become fond of you as
well.  I admit that quite openly.  There's nothing in that for me to be
ashamed of."  It  was very unwelcome for K. to hear the old man speak in
this touching way, as it forced him to explain himself more fully, which
he would rather have avoided, and he was aware that it also confused him
even though it could never make him reverse his decision.  "Thank you
for feeling so friendly toward me," he said, "and I also realise how
deeply involved you've been in my case, as deeply as possible for
yourself and to bring as much advantage as possible to me.  Nonetheless,
I have recently come to the conviction that it is not enough.  I would
naturally never attempt, considering that you are so much older and more
experienced than I am, to convince you of my opinion; if I have ever
unintentionally done so then I beg your forgiveness, but, as you have
just said yourself, the circumstances are important enough and it is my
belief that my trial needs to be approached with much more vigour than
has so far been the case."  "I see," said the lawyer, "you've become
impatient."  "I am not impatient," said K., with some irritation and he
stopped paying so much attention to his choice of words.  "When I first
came here with my uncle you probably noticed I wasn't greatly concerned
about my case, and if I wasn't reminded of it by force, as it were, I
would forget about it completely.  But my uncle insisted I should allow
you to represent me and I did so as a favour to him.  I could have
expected the case to be less of a burden than it had been, as the point
of taking on a lawyer is that he should take on some of its weight.  But
what actually happened was the opposite.  Before, the trial was never
such a worry for me as it has been since you've been representing me.
When I was by myself I never did anything about my case, I was hardly
aware of it, but then, once there was someone representing me,
everything was set for something to happen, I was always, without cease,
waiting for you to do something, getting more and more tense, but you
did nothing.  I did get some information about the court from you that I
probably could not have got anywhere else, but that can't be enough when
the trial, supposedly in secret, is getting closer and closer to me."
K. had pushed the chair away and stood erect, his hands in the pockets
of his frock coat.  "After a certain point in the proceedings," said the
lawyer quietly and calmly, "nothing new of any importance ever happens.
So many litigants, at the same stage in their trials, have stood before
me just like you are now and spoken in the same way."  "Then these other
litigants," said K., "have all been right, just as I am.  That does not
show that I'm not."  "I wasn't trying to show that you were mistaken,"
said the lawyer, "but I wanted to add that I expected better judgement
from you than from the others, especially as I've given you more insight
into the workings of the court and my own activities than I normally do.
And now I'm forced to accept that, despite everything, you have too
little trust in me.  You don't make it easy for me."  How the lawyer was
humiliating himself to K.!  He was showing no regard for the dignity of
his position, which on this point, must have been at its most sensitive.
And why did he do that?  He did seem to be very busy as a lawyer as well
a rich man, neither the loss of income nor the loss of a client could
have been of much importance to him in themselves.  He was moreover
unwell and should have been thinking of passing work on to others.  And
despite all that he held on tightly to K.  Why?  Was it something
personal for his uncle's sake, or did he really see K.'s case as one
that was exceptional and hoped to be able to distinguish himself with
it, either for K.'s sake or - and this possibility could never be
excluded - for his friends at the court?  It was not possible to learn
anything by looking at him, even though K. was scrutinizing him quite
brazenly.  It could almost be supposed he was deliberately hiding his
thoughts as he waited to see what effect his words would have.  But he
clearly deemed K.'s silence to be favourable for himself and he
continued, "You will have noticed the size of my office, but that I
don't employ any staff to help me.  That used to be quite different,
there was a time when several young lawyers were working for me but now
I work alone.  This is partly to do with changes in the way I do
business, in that I concentrate nowadays more and more on matters such
as your own case, and partly to do with the ever deeper understanding
that I acquire from these legal matters.  I found that I could never let
anyone else deal with this sort of work unless I wanted to harm both the
client and the job I had taken on.  But the decision to do all the work
myself had its obvious result: I was forced to turn almost everyone away
who asked me to represent them and could only accept those I was
especially interested in - well there are enough creatures who leap at
every crumb I throw down, and they're not so very far away.  Most
importantly, I became ill from over-work.  But despite that I don't
regret my decision, quite possibly I should have turned more cases away
than I did, but it did turn out to be entirely necessary for me to
devote myself fully to the cases I did take on, and the successful
results showed that it was worth it.  I once read a description of the
difference between representing someone in ordinary legal matters and in
legal matters of this sort, and the writer expressed it very well.  This
is what he said: some lawyers lead their clients on a thread until
judgement is passed, but there are others who immediately lift their
clients onto their shoulders and carry them all the way to the judgement
and beyond.  That's just how it is.  But it was quite true when I said I
never regret all this work.  But if, as in your case, they are so fully
misunderstood, well, then I come very close to regretting it."  All this
talking did more to make K. impatient than to persuade him.  From the
way the lawyer was speaking, K. thought he could hear what he could
expect if he gave in, the delays and excuses would begin again, reports
of how the documents were progressing, how the mood of the court
officials had improved, as well as all the enormous difficulties - in
short all that he had heard so many times before would be brought out
again even more fully, he would try to mislead K. with hopes that were
never specified and to make him suffer with threats that were never
clear.  He had to put a stop to that, so he said, "What will you
undertake on my behalf if you continue to represent me?"  The lawyer
quietly accepted even this insulting question, and answered, "I should
continue with what I've already been doing for you."  "That's just what
I thought," said K., "and now you don't need to say another word."  "I
will make one more attempt," said the lawyer as if whatever had been
making K. so annoyed was affecting him too.  "You see, I have the
impression that you have not only misjudged the legal assistance I have
given you but also that that misjudgement has led you to behave in this
way, you seem, although you are the accused, to have been treated too
well or, to put it a better way, handled with neglect, with apparent
neglect.  Even that has its reason; it is often better to be in chains
than to be free.  But I would like to show you how other defendants are
treated, perhaps you will succeed in learning something from it.  What I
will do is I will call Block in, unlock the door and sit down here
beside the bedside table."  "Be glad to," said K., and did as the lawyer
suggested; he was always ready to learn something new.  But to make sure
of himself for any event he added, "but you do realise that you are no
longer to be my lawyer, don't you?"  "Yes," said the lawyer.  "But you
can still change your mind today if you want to."  He lay back down in
the bed, pulled the quilt up to his chin and turned to face the wall.
Then he rang.

        Leni appeared almost the moment he had done so.  She looked
hurriedly at K. and the lawyer to try and find out what had happened;
she seemed to be reassured by the sight of K. sitting calmly at the
lawyer's bed.  She smiled and nodded to K., K. looked blankly back at
her.  "Fetch Block," said the lawyer.  But instead of going to fetch
him, Leni just went to the door and called out, "Block!  To the lawyer!"
Then, probably because the lawyer had turned his face to the wall and
was paying no attention, she slipped in behind K.'s chair.  From then
on, she bothered him by leaning forward over the back of the chair or,
albeit very tenderly and carefully, she would run her hands through his
hair and over his cheeks.  K. eventually tried to stop her by taking
hold of one hand, and after some resistance Leni let him keep hold of
it.  Block came as soon as he was called, but he remained standing in
the doorway and seemed to be wondering whether he should enter or not.
He raised his eyebrows and lowered his head as if listening to find out
whether the order to attend the lawyer would be repeated.  K. could have
encouraged him to enter, but he had decided to make a final break not only
with the lawyer but with everything in his home, so he kept himself
motionless.  Leni was also silent.  Block noticed that at least no-one
was chasing him away, and, on tiptoe, he entered the room, his face was
tense, his hands were clenched behind his back.  He left the door open
in case he needed to go back again.  K. did not even glance at him, he
looked instead only at the thick quilt under which the lawyer could not
be seen as he had squeezed up very close to the wall.  Then his voice
was heard: "Block here?" he asked.  Block had already crept some way
into the room but this question seemed to give him first a shove in the
breast and then another in the back, he seemed about to fall but
remained standing, deeply bowed, and said, "At your service, sir."
"What do you want?" asked the lawyer, "you've come at a bad time."
"Wasn't I summoned?" asked Block, more to himself than the lawyer.  He
held his hands in front of himself as protection and would have been
ready to run away any moment.  "You were summoned," said the lawyer,
"but you have still come at a bad time."  Then, after a pause he added,
"You always come at a bad time."  When the lawyer started speaking Block
had stopped looking at the bed but stared rather into one of the
corners, just listening, as if the light from the speaker were brighter
than Block could bear to look at.  But it was also difficult for him to
listen, as the lawyer was speaking into the wall and speaking quickly
and quietly.  "Would you like me to go away again, sir?" asked Block.
"Well you're here now," said the lawyer. "Stay!"  It was as if the
lawyer had not done as Block had wanted but instead threatened him with
a stick, as now Block really began to shake.  "I went to see," said the
lawyer, "the third judge yesterday, a friend of mine, and slowly brought
the conversation round to the subject of you.  Do you want to know what
he said?"  "Oh, yes please," said Block.  The lawyer did not answer
immediately, so Block repeated his request and lowered his head as if
about to kneel down.  But then K. spoke to him:  "What do you think
you're doing?" he shouted.  Leni had wanted to stop him from calling out
and so he took hold of her other hand.  It was not love that made him
squeeze it and hold on to it so tightly, she sighed frequently and tried
to disengage her hands from him.  But Block was punished for K.'s
outburst, as the lawyer asked him, "Who is your lawyer?"  "You are,
sir," said Block.  "And who besides me?" the lawyer asked.  "No-one
besides you, sir," said Block.  "And let there be no-one besides me,"
said the lawyer.  Block fully understood what that meant, he glowered at
K., shaking his head violently.  If these actions had been translated
into words they would have been coarse insults.  K. had been friendly
and willing to discuss his own case with someone like this!  "I won't
disturb you any more," said K., leaning back in his chair.  "You can
kneel down or creep on all fours, whatever you like.  I won't bother
with you any more."  But Block still had some sense of pride, at least
where K. was concerned, and he went towards him waving his fists,
shouting as loudly as he dared while the lawyer was there.  "You
shouldn't speak to me like that, that's not allowed.  Why are you
insulting me?  Especially here in front of the lawyer, where both of us,
you and me, we're only tolerated because of his charity.  You're not a
better person than me, you've been accused of something too, you're
facing a charge too.  If, in spite of that, you're still a gentleman
then I'm just as much a gentleman as you are, if not even more so.  And
I want to be spoken to as a gentleman, especially by you.  If you think
being allowed to sit there and quietly listen while I creep on all fours
as you put it makes you something better than me, then there's an old
legal saying you ought to bear in mind: If you're under suspicion it's
better to be moving than still, as if you're still you can be in the pan
of the scales without knowing it and be weighed along with your sins."
K. said nothing.  He merely looked in amazement at this distracted
being, his eyes completely still.  He had gone through such changes in
just the last few hours!  Was it the trial that was throwing him from
side to side in this way and stopped him knowing who was friend and who
was foe?  Could he not see the lawyer was deliberately humiliating him
and had no other purpose today than to show off his power to K., and
perhaps even thereby subjugate K.?  But if Block was incapable of seeing
that, or if he so feared the lawyer that no such insight would even be
of any use to him, how was it that he was either so sly or so bold as to
lie to the lawyer and conceal from him the fact that he had other
lawyers working on his behalf?  And how did he dare to attack K., who
could betray his secret any time he liked?  But he dared even more than
this, he went to the lawyer's bed and began there to make complaints
about K.  "Dr. Huld, sir," he said, "did you hear the way this man spoke
to me?  You can count the length of his trial in hours, and he wants to
tell me what to do when I've been involved in a legal case for five
years.  He even insults me.  He doesn't know anything, but he insults
me, when I, as far as my weak ability allows, when I've made a close
study of how to behave with the court, what we ought to do and what the
court practices are."  "Don't let anyone bother you," said the lawyer,
"and do what seems to you to be right."  "I will," said Block, as if
speaking to himself to give himself courage, and with a quick glance to
the side he kneeled down close beside the bed.  "I'm kneeling now Dr.
Huld, sir," he said.  But the lawyer remained silent.  With one hand,
Block carefully stroked the bed cover.  In the silence while he did so,
Leni, as she freed herself from K.'s hands, said, "You're hurting me.
Let go of me.  I'm going over to Block."  She went over to him and sat
on the edge of the bed.  Block was very pleased at this and with lively,
but silent, gestures he immediately urged her to intercede for him with
the lawyer.  It was clear that he desperately needed to be told
something by the lawyer, although perhaps only so that he could make use
of the information with his other lawyers.  Leni probably knew very well
how the lawyer could be brought round, pointed to his hand and pursed
her lips as if making a kiss.  Block immediately performed the hand-kiss
and, at further urging from Leni, repeated it twice more.  But the
lawyer continued to be silent.  Then Leni leant over the lawyer, as she
stretched out, the attractive shape of her body could be seen, and, bent
over close to his face, she stroked his long white hair.  That now
forced him to give an answer.  "I'm rather wary of telling him," said
the lawyer, and his head could be seen shaking slightly, perhaps so that
he would feel the pressure of Leni's hand better.  Block listened
closely with his head lowered, as if by listening he were breaking an
order.  "What makes you so wary about it?" asked Leni.  K. had the
feeling he was listening to a contrived dialogue that had been repeated
many times, that would be repeated many times more, and that for Block
alone it would never lose its freshness.  "What has his behaviour been
like today?" asked the lawyer instead of an answer.  Before Leni said
anything she looked down at Block and watched him a short while as he
raised his hands towards her and rubbed them together imploringly.
Finally she gave a serious nod, turned back to the lawyer and said,
"He's been quiet and industrious."  This was an elderly businessman, a
man whose beard was long, and he was begging a young girl to speak on
his behalf.  Even if there was some plan behind what he did, there was
nothing that could reinstate him in the eyes of his fellow man.  K.
could not understand how the lawyer could have thought this performance
would win him over.  Even if he had done nothing earlier to make him
want to leave then this scene would have done so.  It was almost
humiliating even for the onlooker.  So these were the lawyer's methods,
which K. fortunately had not been exposed to for long, to let the client
forget about the whole world and leave him with nothing but the hope of
reaching the end of his trial by this deluded means.  He was no longer a
client, he was the lawyer's dog.  If the lawyer had ordered him to crawl
under the bed as if it were a kennel and to bark out from under it, then
he would have done so with enthusiasm.  K. listened to all of this,
testing it and thinking it over as if he had been given the task of
closely observing everything spoken here, inform a higher office about
it and write a report.  "And what has he been doing all day?" asked the
lawyer.  "I kept him locked in the maid's room all day," said Leni, "so
that he wouldn't stop me doing my work.  That's where he usually stays.
From time to time I looked in through the spyhole to see what he was
doing, and each time he was kneeling on the bed and reading the papers
you gave him, propped up on the window sill.  That made a good
impression on me; as the window only opens onto an air shaft and gives
hardly any light.  It showed how obedient he is that he was even reading
in those conditions."  "I'm pleased to hear it," said the lawyer.  "But
did he understand what he was reading?"  While this conversation was
going on, Block continually moved his lips and was clearly formulating
the answers he hoped Leni would give.  "Well I can't give you any
certain answer to that of course," said Leni, "but I could see that he
was reading thoroughly.  He spent all day reading the same page, running
his finger along the lines.  Whenever I looked in on him he sighed as if
this reading was a lot of work for him.  I expect the papers you gave
him were very hard to understand."  "Yes," said the lawyer, "they
certainly are that.  And I really don't think he understood anything of
them.  But they should at least give him some inkling of just how hard a
struggle it is and how much work it is for me to defend him.  And who am
I doing all this hard work for?  I'm doing it - it's laughable even to
say it - I'm doing it for Block.  He ought to realise what that means,
too.  Did he study without a pause?"  "Almost without a pause," answered
Leni.  "Just the once he asked me for a drink of water, so I gave him a
glassful through the window.  Then at eight o'clock I let him out and
gave him something to eat."  Block glanced sideways at K., as if he were
being praised and had to impress K. as well.  He now seemed more
optimistic, he moved more freely and rocked back and forth on his knees.
This made his astonishment all the more obvious when he heard the
following words from the lawyer:  "You speak well of him," said the
lawyer, "but that's just what makes it difficult for me.  You see, the
judge did not speak well of him at all, neither about Block nor about
his case."  "Didn't speak well of him?" asked Leni.  "How is that
possible?"  Block looked at her with such tension he seemed to think
that although the judge's words had been spoken so long before she would
be able to change them in his favour.  "Not at all," said the lawyer.
"In fact he became quite cross when I started to talk about Block to
him. 'Don't talk to me about Block,' he said.  'He is my client,' said
I.  'You're letting him abuse you,' he said.  'I don't think his case is
lost yet,' said I.  'You're letting him abuse you,' he repeated.  'I
don't think so,' said I.  'Block works hard in his case and always knows
where it stands.  He practically lives with me so that he always knows
what's happening.  You don't always find such enthusiasm as that.  He's
not very pleasant personally, I grant you, his manners are terrible and
he's dirty, but as far as the trial's concerned he's quite immaculate.'
I said immaculate, but I was deliberately exaggerating.   Then he said,
'Block is sly, that's all.  He's accumulated plenty of experience and
knows how to delay proceedings.  But there's more that he doesn't know
than he does.  What do you think he'd say if he learned his trial still
hasn't begun, if you told him they haven't even rung the bell to
announce the start of proceedings?'  Alright Block, alright," said the
lawyer, as at these words Block had begun to raise himself on his
trembling knees and clearly wanted to plead for some explanation.  It
was the first time the lawyer had spoken any clear words directly to
Block.  He looked down with his tired eyes, half blankly and half at
Block, who slowly sank back down on his knees under this gaze.  "What
the judge said has no meaning for you," said the lawyer.  "You needn't
be frightened at every word.  If you do it again I won't tell you
anything else at all.  It's impossible to start a sentence without you
looking at me as if you were receiving your final judgement.  You should
be ashamed of yourself here in front of my client!  And you're
destroying the trust he has for me.  Just what is it you want?  You're
still alive, you're still under my protection.  There's no point in
worrying!  Somewhere you've read that the final judgement can often come
without warning, from anyone at any time.  And, in the right
circumstances, that's basically true, but it's also true that I dislike
your anxiety and fear and see that you don't have the trust in me you
should have.  Now what have I just said?  I repeated something said by
one of the judges.  You know that there are so many various opinions
about the procedure that they form into a great big pile and nobody can
make any sense of them.  This judge, for instance, sees proceedings as
starting at a different point from where I do.  A difference of opinion,
nothing more.  At a certain stage in the proceedings tradition has it
that a sign is given by ringing a bell.  This judge sees that as the
point at which proceedings begin.  I can't set out all the opinions
opposed to that view here, and you wouldn't understand it anyway,
suffice it to say that there are many reasons to disagree with him."
Embarrassed, Block ran his fingers through the pile of the carpet, his
anxiety about what the judge had said had let him forget his inferior
status towards the lawyer for a while, he thought only about himself and
turned the judges words round to examine them from all sides.  "Block,"
said Leni, as if reprimanding him, and, taking hold of the collar of his
coat, pulled him up slightly higher.  "Leave the carpet alone and listen
to what the lawyer is saying."

This chapter was left unfinished.




Chapter Nine
In the Cathedral

        A very important Italian business contact of the bank had come to
visit the city for the first time and K. was given the task of showing
him some of its cultural sights.  At any other time he would have seen
this job as an honour but now, when he was finding it hard even to
maintain his current position in the bank, he accepted it only with
reluctance.  Every hour that he could not be in the office was a cause
of concern for him, he was no longer able to make use of his time in the
office anything like as well as he had previously, he spent many hours
merely pretending to do important work, but that only increased his
anxiety about not being in the office.  Then he sometimes thought he saw
the deputy director, who was always watching, come into K.'s office, sit
at his desk, look through his papers, receive clients who had almost
become old friends of K., and lure them away from him, perhaps he even
discovered mistakes, mistakes that seemed to threaten K. from a thousand
directions when he was at work now, and which he could no longer avoid.
So now, if he was ever asked to leave the office on business or even
needed to make a short business trip, however much an honour it seemed -
and tasks of this sort happened to have increased substantially recently
- there was always the suspicion that they wanted to get him out of his
office for a while and check his work, or at least the idea that they
thought he was dispensable.  It would not have been difficult for him to
turn down most of these jobs, but he did not dare to do so because, if
his fears had the slightest foundation, turning the jobs down would have
been an acknowledgement of them.  For this reason, he never demurred
from accepting them, and even when he was asked to go on a tiring
business trip lasting two days he said nothing about having to go out in
the rainy autumn weather when he had a severe chill, just in order to
avoid the risk of not being asked to go.  When, with a raging headache,
he arrived back from this trip he learned that he had been chosen to
accompany the Italian business contact the following day.  The
temptation for once to turn the job down was very great, especially as
it had no direct connection with business, but there was no denying that
social obligations towards this business contact were in themselves
important enough, only not for K., who knew quite well that he needed
some successes at work if he was to maintain his position there and
that, if he failed in that, it would not help him even if this Italian
somehow found him quite charming; he did not want to be removed from his
workplace for even one day, as the fear of not being allowed back in was
too great, he knew full well that the fear was exaggerated but it still
made him anxious.  However, in this case it was almost impossible to
think of an acceptable excuse, his knowledge of Italian was not great
but still good enough; the deciding factor was that K. had earlier known
a little about art history and this had become widely known around the
bank in extremely exaggerated form, and that K. had been a member of the
Society for the Preservation of City Monuments, albeit only for business
reasons.  It was said that this Italian was an art lover, so the choice
of K. to accompany him was a matter of course.

        It was a very rainy and stormy morning when K., in a foul temper
at the thought of the day ahead of him, arrived early at seven o'clock
in the office so that he could at least do some work before his visitor
would prevent him.  He had spent half the night studying a book of
Italian grammar so that he would be somewhat prepared and was very
tired; his desk was less attractive to him than the window where he had
spent far too much time sitting of late, but he resisted the temptation
and sat down to his work.  Unfortunately, just then the servitor came in
and reported that the director had sent him to see whether the chief
clerk was already in his office; if he was, then would he please be so
kind as to come to his reception room as the gentleman from Italy was
already there.  "I'll come straight away," said K.  He put a small
dictionary in his pocket, took a guide to the city's tourist sites under
his arm that he had compiled for strangers, and went through the deputy
director's office into that of the director.  He was glad he had come
into the office so early and was able to be of service immediately,
nobody could seriously have expected that of him.  The deputy director's
office was, of course, still as empty as the middle of the night, the
servitor had probably been asked to summon him too but without success.
As K. entered the reception room two men stood up from the deep
armchairs where they had been sitting.  The director gave him a friendly
smile, he was clearly very glad that K. was there, he immediately
introduced him to the Italian who shook K.'s hand vigorously and joked
that somebody was an early riser.  K. did not quite understand whom he
had in mind, it was moreover an odd expression to use and it took K. a
little while to guess its meaning.  He replied with a few bland phrases
which the Italian received once more with a laugh, passing his hand
nervously and repeatedly over his blue-grey, bushy moustache.  This
moustache was obviously perfumed, it was almost tempting to come close
to it and sniff.  When they had all sat down and begun a light
preliminary conversation, K. was disconcerted to notice that he
understood no more than fragments of what the Italian said.  When he
spoke very calmly he understood almost everything, but that was very
infrequent, mostly the words gushed from his mouth and he seemed to be
enjoying himself so much his head shook.  When he was talking in this
way his speech was usually wrapped up in some kind of dialect which
seemed to K. to have nothing to do with Italian but which the director
not only understood but also spoke, although K. ought to have foreseen
this as the Italian came from the south of his country where the
director had also spent several years.  Whatever the cause, K. realised
that the possibility of communicating with the Italian had been largely
taken from him, even his French was difficult to understand, and his
moustache concealed the movements of his lips which might have offered
some help in understanding what he said.  K. began to anticipate many
difficulties,  he gave up trying to understand what the Italian said -
with the director there, who could understand him so easily, it would
have been pointless effort - and for the time being did no more than
scowl at the Italian as he relaxed sitting deep but comfortable in the
armchair, as he frequently pulled at his short, sharply tailored jacket
and at one time lifted his arms in the air and moved his hands freely to
try and depict something that K. could not grasp, even though he was
leaning forward and did not let the hands out of his sight.   K. had
nothing to occupy himself but mechanically watch the exchange between
the two men and his tiredness finally made itself felt, to his alarm,
although fortunately in good time, he once caught himself nearly getting
up, turning round and leaving.  Eventually the Italian looked at the
clock and jumped up.  After taking his leave from the director he turned
to K., pressing himself so close to him that K. had to push his chair
back just so that he could move.  The director had, no doubt, seen the
anxiety in K.'s eyes as he tried to cope with this dialect of Italian,
he joined in with this conversation in a way that was so adroit and
unobtrusive that he seemed to be adding no more than minor comments,
whereas in fact he was swiftly and patiently breaking into what the
Italian said so that K. could understand.  K. learned in this way that
the Italian first had a few business matters to settle, that he
unfortunately had only a little time at his disposal, that he certainly
did not intend to rush round to see every monument in the city, that he
would much rather - at least as long as K. would agree, it was entirely
his decision  - just see the cathedral and to do so thoroughly.  He was
extremely pleased to be accompanied by someone who was so learned and so
pleasant - by this he meant K., who was occupied not with listening to
the Italian but the director - and asked if he would be so kind, if the
time was suitable, to meet him in the cathedral in two hours' time at
about ten o'clock.  He hoped he would certainly be able to be there at
that time.  K. made an appropriate reply, the Italian shook first the
director's hand and then K.'s, then the director's again and went to the
door, half turned to the two men who followed him and continuing to talk
without a break.  K. remained together with the director for a short
while, although the director looked especially unhappy today.  He
thought he needed to apologise to K. for something and told him - they
were standing intimately close together - he had thought at first he
would accompany the Italian himself, but then - he gave no more precise
reason than this - then he decided it would be better to send K. with
him.  He should not be surprised if he could not understand the Italian
at first, he would be able to very soon, and even if he really could not
understand very much he said it was not so bad, as it was really not so
important for the Italian to be understood.  And anyway, K.'s knowledge
of Italian was surprisingly good, the director was sure he would get by
very well.  And with that, it was time for K. to go.  He spent the time
still remaining to him with a dictionary, copying out obscure words he
would need to guide the Italian round the cathedral.  It was an
extremely irksome task, servitors brought him the mail, bank staff came
with various queries and, when they saw that K. was busy, stood by the
door and did not go away until he had listened to them, the deputy
director did not miss the opportunity to disturb K. and came in
frequently, took the dictionary from his hand and flicked through its
pages, clearly for no purpose, when the door to the ante-room opened
even clients would appear from the  half darkness and bow timidly to him
- they wanted to attract his attention but were not sure whether he had
seen them - all this activity was circling around K. with him at its
centre while he compiled the list of words he would need, then looked
them up in the dictionary, then wrote them out, then practised their
pronunciation and finally tried to learn them by heart.  The good
intentions he had had earlier, though, seemed to have left him
completely, it was the Italian who had caused him all this effort and
sometimes he became so angry with him that he buried the dictionary
under some papers firmly intending to do no more preparation, but then
he realised he could not walk up and down in the cathedral with the
Italian without saying a word, so, in an even greater rage, he
pulled the dictionary back out again.

        At exactly half past nine, just when he was about to leave, there
was a telephone call for him, Leni wished him good morning and asked how
he was, K. thanked her hurriedly and told her it was impossible for him
to talk now as he had to go to the cathedral. "To the cathedral?" asked
Leni.  "Yes, to the cathedral."  "What do you have to go to the
cathedral for?" said Leni.  K. tried to explain it to her briefly, but
he had hardly begun when Leni suddenly said, "They're harassing you."
One thing that K. could not bear was pity that he had not wanted or
expected, he took his leave of her with two words, but as he put the
receiver back in its place he said, half to himself and half to the girl
on the other end of the line who could no longer hear him, "Yes, they're
harassing me."

        By now the time was late and there was almost a danger he would
not be on time.  He took a taxi to the cathedral, at the last moment he
had remembered the album that he had had no opportunity to give to the
Italian earlier and so took it with him now.  He held it on his knees
and drummed impatiently on it during the whole journey.  The rain had
eased off slightly but it was still damp chilly and dark, it would be
difficult to see anything in the cathedral but standing about on cold
flagstones might well make K.'s chill much worse.  The square in front
of the cathedral was quite empty, K. remembered how even as a small
child he had noticed that nearly all the houses in this narrow square
had the curtains at their windows closed most of the time, although
today, with the weather like this, it was more understandable.  The
cathedral also seemed quite empty, of course no-one would think of going
there on a day like this.  K. hurried along both the side naves but saw
no-one but an old woman who, wrapped up in a warm shawl, was kneeling at
a picture of the Virgin Mary and staring up at it.  Then, in the
distance, he saw a church official who limped away through a doorway in
the wall.  K. had arrived on time, it had struck ten just as he was
entering the building, but the Italian still was not there.  K. went
back to the main entrance, stood there indecisively for a while, and
then walked round the cathedral in the rain in case the Italian was
waiting at another entrance.  He was nowhere to be found.  Could the
director have misunderstood what time they had agreed on?  How could
anyone understand someone like that properly anyway?  Whatever had
happened, K. would have to wait for him for at least half an hour.  As
he was tired he wanted to sit down, he went back inside the cathedral,
he found something like a small carpet on one of the steps, he moved it
with his foot to a nearby pew, wrapped himself up tighter in his coat,
put the collar up and sat down.  To pass the time he opened the album
and flicked through the pages a little but soon had to give up as it
became so dark that when he looked up he could hardly make out anything
in the side nave next to him.

        In the distance there was a large triangle of candles flickering
on the main altar, K. was not certain whether he had seen them earlier.
Perhaps they had only just been lit.  Church staff creep silently as
part of their job, you don't notice them.  When K. happened to turn
round he also saw a tall, stout candle attached to a column not far
behind him.  It was all very pretty, but totally inadequate to
illuminate the pictures which were usually left in the darkness of the
side altars, and seemed to make the darkness all the deeper.  It was
discourteous of the Italian not to come but it was also sensible of him,
there would have been nothing to see, they would have had to content
themselves with seeking out a few pictures with K.'s electric pocket
torch and looking at them one small part at a time.  K. went over to a
nearby side chapel to see what they could have hoped for, he went up a
few steps to a low marble railing and leant over it to look at the altar
picture by the light of his torch.  The eternal light hung disturbingly
in front of it.  The first thing that K. partly saw and partly guessed
at was a large knight in armour who was shown at the far edge of the
painting.  He was leaning on his sword that he had stuck into the naked
ground in front of him where only a few blades of grass grew here and
there.  He seemed to be paying close attention to something that was
being played out in front of him.  It was astonishing to see how he
stood there without going any closer.  Perhaps it was his job to stand
guard.  It was a long time since K. had looked at any pictures and he
studied the knight for a long time even though he had continually to
blink as he found it difficult to bear the green light of his torch.
Then when he moved the light to the other parts of the picture he found
an interment of Christ shown in the usual way, it was also a
comparatively new painting.  He put his torch away and went back to his
place.

        There seemed to be no point in waiting for the Italian any longer,
but outside it was certainly raining heavily, and as it was not so cold
in the cathedral as K. had expected he decided to stay there for the
time being.  Close by him was the great pulpit, there were two plain
golden crosses attached to its little round roof which were lying almost
flat and whose tips crossed over each other.  The outside of the
pulpit's balustrade was covered in green foliage which continued down to
the column supporting it, little angels could be seen among the leaves,
some of them lively and some of them still.  K. walked up to the pulpit
and examined it from all sides, its stonework had been sculpted with
great care, it seemed as if the foliage had trapped a deep darkness
between and behind its leaves and held it there prisoner, K. lay his
hand in one of these gaps and cautiously felt the stone, until then he
had been totally unaware of this pulpit's existence.  Then K. happened
to notice one of the church staff standing behind the next row of pews,
he wore a loose, creased, black cassock, he held a snuff box in his left
hand and he was watching K.  Now what does he want? thought K.  Do I
seem suspicious to him?  Does he want a tip?  But when the man in the
cassock saw that K. had noticed him he raised his right hand, a pinch of
snuff still held between two fingers, and pointed in some vague
direction.  It was almost impossible to understand what this behaviour
meant, K. waited a while longer but the man in the cassock did not stop
gesturing with his hand and even augmented it by nodding his head.  "Now
what does he want?" asked K. quietly, he did not dare call out loud
here; but then he drew out his purse and pushed his way through the
nearest pews to reach the man.  He, however, immediately gestured to
turn down this offer, shrugged his shoulders and limped away.  As a
child K. had imitated riding on a horse with the same sort of movement
as this limp.  "This old man is like a child," thought K., "he doesn't
have the sense for anything more than serving in a church.  Look at the
way he stops when I stop, and how he waits to see whether I'll
continue."  With a smile, K. followed the old man all the way up the
side nave and almost as far as the main altar, all this time the old man
continued to point at something but K. deliberately avoided looking
round, he was only pointing in order to make it harder for K. to follow
him.  Eventually, K. did stop following, he did not want to worry the
old man too much, and he also did not want to frighten him away
completely in case the Italian turned up after all.

        When he entered the central nave to go back to where he had left
the album, he noticed a small secondary pulpit on a column almost next
to the stalls by the altar where the choir sat.  It was very simple,
made of plain white stone, and so small that from a distance it looked
like an empty niche where the statue of a saint ought to have been.  It
certainly would have been impossible for the priest to take a full step
back from the balustrade, and, although there was no decoration on it,
the top of the pulpit curved in exceptionally low so that a man of
average height would not be able stand upright and would have to remain
bent forward over the balustrade.  In all, it looked as if it had been
intended to make the priest suffer, it was impossible to understand why
this pulpit would be needed as there were also the other ones available
which were large and so artistically decorated.

        And K. would certainly not have noticed this little pulpit if
there had not been a lamp fastened above it, which usually meant there
was a sermon about to be given.  So was a sermon to be given now?  In
this empty church?  K. looked down at the steps which, pressed close
against the column, led up to the pulpit.  They were so narrow they
seemed to be there as decoration on the column rather than for anyone to
use.  But under the pulpit - K. grinned in astonishment - there really
was a priest standing with his hand on the handrail ready to climb the
steps and looking at K.  Then he nodded very slightly, so that K.
crossed himself and genuflected as he should have done earlier.  With a
little swing, the priest went up into the pulpit with short fast steps.
Was there really a sermon about to begin?  Maybe the man in the cassock
had not been really so demented, and had meant to lead K.'s way to the
preacher, which in this empty church would have been very necessary.
And there was also, somewhere in front of a picture of the Virgin Mary,
an old woman who should have come to hear the sermon.  And if there was
to be a sermon why had it not been introduced on the organ?  But the
organ remained quiet and merely looked out weakly from the darkness of
its great height.

        K. now considered whether he should leave as quickly as possible,
if he did not do it now there would be no chance of doing so during the
sermon and he would have to stay there for as long as it lasted, he had
lost so much time when he should have been in his office, there had long
been no need for him to wait for the Italian any longer, he looked at
his watch, it was eleven.  But could there really be a sermon given?
Could K. constitute the entire congregation?  How could he when he was
just a stranger who wanted to look at the church?  That, basically, was
all he was.  The idea of a sermon, now, at eleven o'clock, on a workday,
in hideous weather, was nonsense.  The priest - there was no doubt that
he was a priest, a young man with a smooth, dark face - was clearly
going up there just to put the lamp out after somebody had lit it by
mistake.

        But there had been no mistake, the priest seemed rather to check
that the lamp was lit and turned it a little higher, then he slowly
turned to face the front and leant down on the balustrade gripping its
angular rail with both hands.  He stood there like that for a while and,
without turning his head, looked around.  K. had moved back a long way
and leant his elbows on the front pew.  Somewhere in the church - he
could not have said exactly where - he could make out the man in the
cassock hunched under his bent back and at peace, as if his work were
completed.  In the cathedral it was now very quiet!  But K. would have
to disturb that silence, he had no intention of staying there; if it was
the priest's duty to preach at a certain time regardless of the
circumstances then he could, and he could do it without K.'s taking
part, and K.'s presence would do nothing to augment the effect of it.
So K. began slowly to move, felt his way on tiptoe along the pew,
arrived at the broad aisle and went along it without being disturbed,
except for the sound of his steps, however light, which rang out on the
stone floor and resounded from the vaulting, quiet but continuous at a
repeating, regular pace.  K. felt slightly abandoned as, probably
observed by the priest, he walked by himself between the empty pews, and
the size of the cathedral seemed to be just at the limit of what a man
could bear.  When he arrived back at where he had been sitting he did
not hesitate but simply reached out for the album he had left there and
took it with him.  He had nearly left the area covered by pews and was
close to the  empty space between himself and the exit when, for the
first time, he heard the voice of the priest.  A powerful and
experienced voice.  It pierced through the reaches of the cathedral
ready waiting for it!  But the priest was not calling out to the
congregation, his cry was quite unambiguous and there was no escape from
it, he called "Josef K.!"

        K. stood still and looked down at the floor.  In theory he was
still free, he could have carried on walking, through one of three dark
little wooden doors not far in front of him and away from there.  It
would simply mean he had not understood, or that he had understood but
chose not to pay attention to it.  But if he once turned round he would
be trapped, then he would have acknowledged that he had understood
perfectly well, that he really was the Josef K. the priest had called to
and that he was willing to follow.  If the priest had called out again
K. would certainly have carried on out the door, but everything was
silent as K. also waited, he turned his head slightly as he wanted to
see what the priest was doing now.  He was merely standing in the pulpit
as before, but it was obvious that he had seen K. turn his head.  If K.
did not now turn round completely it would have been like a child
playing hide and seek.  He did so, and the priest beckoned him with his
finger.  As everything could now be done openly he ran - because of
curiosity and the wish to get it over with - with long flying leaps
towards the pulpit.  At the front pews he stopped, but to the priest he
still seemed too far away, he reached out his hand and pointed sharply
down with his finger to a place immediately in front of the pulpit.  And
K. did as he was told, standing in that place he had to bend his head a
long way back just to see the priest.  "You are Josef K.," said the
priest, and raised his hand from the balustrade to make a gesture whose
meaning was unclear.  "Yes," said K., he considered how freely he had
always given his name in the past, for some time now it had been a
burden to him, now there were people who knew his name whom he had never
seen before, it had been so nice first to introduce yourself and only
then for people to know who you were.  "You have been accused," said the
priest, especially gently.  "Yes," said K., "so I have been informed."
"Then you are the one I am looking for," said the priest.  "I am the
prison chaplain."  "I see," said K.  "I had you summoned here," said the
priest, "because I wanted to speak to you."  "I knew nothing of that,"
said K.  "I came here to show the cathedral to a gentleman from Italy."
"That is beside the point," said the priest.  "What are you holding in
your hand?  Is it a prayer book?"  "No," answered K., "it's an album of
the city's tourist sights."  "Put it down," said the priest.  K. threw
it away with such force that it flapped open and rolled across the
floor, tearing its pages.  "Do you know your case is going badly?" asked
the priest.  "That's how it seems to me too," said K.  "I've expended a
lot of effort on it, but so far with no result.  Although I do still
have some documents to submit."  "How do you imagine it will end?" asked
the priest.  "At first I thought it was bound to end well," said K.,
"but now I have my doubts about it.  I don't know how it will end.  Do
you know?"  "I don't," said the priest, "but I fear it will end badly.
You are considered guilty.  Your case will probably not even go beyond a
minor court.  Provisionally at least, your guilt is seen as proven."
"But I'm not guilty," said K., "there's been a mistake.  How is it even
possible for someone to be guilty.  We're all human beings here, one
like the other."  "That is true," said the priest, "but that is how the
guilty speak."  "Do you presume I'm guilty too?" asked K.  "I make no
presumptions about you," said the priest.  "I thank you for that," said
K. "but everyone else involved in these proceedings has something
against me and presumes I'm guilty.  They even influence those who
aren't involved.  My position gets harder all the time."  "You don't
understand the facts," said the priest, "the verdict does not come
suddenly, proceedings continue until a verdict is reached gradually."
"I see," said K., lowering his head.  "What do you intend to do about
your case next?" asked the priest.  "I still need to find help," said
K., raising his head to see what the priest thought of this.  "There are
still certain possibilities I haven't yet made use of."  "You look for
too much help from people you don't know," said the priest
disapprovingly, "and especially from women.  Can you really not see
that's not the help you need?"  "Sometimes, in fact quite often, I could
believe you're right," said K., "but not always.  Women have a lot of
power.  If I could persuade some of the women I know to work together
with me then I would be certain to succeed.  Especially in a court like
this that seems to consist of nothing but woman-chasers.  Show the
examining judge a woman in the distance and he'll run right over the
desk, and the accused, just to get to her as soon as he can."  The
priest lowered his head down to the balustrade, only now did the roof
over the pulpit seem to press him down.  What sort of dreadful weather
could it be outside?  It was no longer just a dull day, it was deepest
night.  None of the stained glass in the main window shed even a flicker
of light on the darkness of the walls.  And this was the moment when the
man in the cassock chose to put out the candles on the main altar, one
by one.  "Are you cross with me?" asked K.  "Maybe you don't know what
sort of court it is you serve."  He received no answer.  "Well, it's
just my own experience," said K.  Above him there was still silence.  "I
didn't mean to insult you," said K.  At that, the priest screamed down
at K.:  "Can you not see two steps in front of you?"  He shouted in
anger, but it was also the scream of one who sees another fall and,
shocked and without thinking, screams against his own will.

        The two men, then, remained silent for a long time.  In the
darkness beneath him, the priest could not possibly have seen K.
distinctly, although K. was able to see him clearly by the light of the
little lamp.  Why did the priest not come down?  He had not given a
sermon, he had only told K. a few things which, if he followed them
closely, would probably cause him more harm than good.  But the priest
certainly seemed to mean well, it might even be possible, if he would
come down and cooperate with him, it might even be possible for him to
obtain some acceptable piece of advice that could make all the
difference, it might, for instance, be able to show him not so much to
influence the proceedings but how to break free of them, how to evade
them, how to live away from them.  K. had to admit that this was
something he had had on his mind quite a lot of late.  If the priest
knew of such a possibility he might, if K. asked him, let him know about
it, even though he was part of the court himself and even though, when
K. had criticised the court, he had held down his gentle nature and
actually shouted at K.

        "Would you not like to come down here?" asked K.  "If you're not
going to give a sermon come down here with me."  "Now I can come down,"
said the priest, perhaps he regretted having shouted at K.  As he took
down the lamp from its hook he said, "to start off with I had to speak
to you from a distance.  Otherwise I'm too easily influenced and forget
my duty."

        K. waited for him at the foot of the steps.  While he was still on
one of the higher steps as he  came down them the priest reached out his
hand for K. to shake.  "Can you spare me a little of your time?" asked
K.  "As much time as you need," said the priest, and passed him the
little lamp for him to carry.  Even at close distance the priest did not
lose a certain solemnity that seemed to be part of his character.  "You
are very friendly towards me," said K., as they walked up and down
beside each other in the darkness of one of the side naves.  "That makes
you an exception among all those who belong to the court.  I can trust
you more than any of the others I've seen.  I can speak openly with
you."  "Don't fool yourself," said the priest.  "How would I be fooling
myself?" asked K.  "You fool yourself in the court," said the priest,
"it talks about this self-deceit in the opening paragraphs to the law.
In front of the law there is a doorkeeper.  A man from the countryside
comes up to the door and asks for entry.  But the doorkeeper says he
can't let him in to the law right now.  The man thinks about this, and
then he asks if he'll be able to go in later on.  'That's possible,'
says the doorkeeper, 'but not now'.  The gateway to the law is open as
it always is, and the doorkeeper has stepped to one side, so the man
bends over to try and see in.  When the doorkeeper notices this he
laughs and says, 'If you're tempted give it a try, try and go in even
though I say you can't.  Careful though: I'm powerful.  And I'm only the
lowliest of all the doormen.  But there's a doorkeeper for each of the
rooms and each of them is more powerful than the last.  It's more than I
can stand just to look at the third one.'  The man from the country had
not expected difficulties like this, the law was supposed to be
accessible for anyone at any time, he thinks, but now he looks more
closely at the doorkeeper in his fur coat, sees his big hooked nose, his
long thin tartar-beard, and he decides it's better to wait until he has
permission to enter.  The doorkeeper gives him a stool and lets him sit
down to one side of the gate.  He sits there for days and years.  He
tries to be allowed in time and again and tires the doorkeeper with his
requests.  The doorkeeper often questions him, asking about where he's
from and many other things, but these are disinterested questions such
as great men ask, and he always ends up by telling him he still can't
let him in.  The man had come well equipped for his journey, and uses
everything, however valuable, to bribe the doorkeeper.  He accepts
everything, but as he does so he says, 'I'll only accept this so that
you don't think there's anything you've failed to do'.  Over many years,
the man watches the doorkeeper almost without a break.  He forgets about
the other doormen, and begins to think this one is the only thing
stopping him from gaining access to the law. Over the first few years he
curses his unhappy condition out loud, but later, as he becomes old, he
just grumbles to himself.  He becomes senile, and as he has come to know
even the fleas in the doorkeeper's fur collar over the years that he has
been studying him he even asks them to help him and change the
doorkeeper's mind.  Finally his eyes grow dim, and he no longer knows
whether it's really getting darker or just his eyes that are deceiving
him.  But he seems now to see an inextinguishable light begin to shine
from the darkness behind the door.  He doesn't have long to live now.
Just before he dies, he brings together all his experience from all this
time into one question which he has still never put to the doorkeeper.
He beckons to him, as he's no longer able to raise his stiff body.  The
doorkeeper has to bend over deeply as the difference in their sizes has
changed very much to the disadvantage of the man.  'What is it you want
to know now?' asks the doorkeeper, 'You're insatiable.'  'Everyone wants
access to the law,' says the man, 'how come, over all these years, no-
one but me has asked to be let in?'  The doorkeeper can see the man's
come to his end, his hearing has faded, and so, so that he can be heard,
he shouts to him: 'Nobody else could have got in this way, as this
entrance was meant only for you.  Now I'll go and close it'."

        "So the doorkeeper cheated the man," said K. immediately, who had
been captivated by the story.  "Don't be too quick," said the priest,
"don't take somebody else's opinion without checking it.  I told you the
story exactly as it was written.  There's nothing in there about
cheating."  "But it's quite clear," said K., "and your first
interpretation of it was quite correct.  The doorkeeper gave him the
information that would release him only when it could be of no more
use."  "He didn't ask him before that," said the priest, "and don't
forget he was only a doorkeeper, and as doorkeeper he did his duty."
"What makes you think he did his duty?" asked K., "He didn't.  It might
have been his duty to keep everyone else away, but this man is who the
door was intended for and he ought to have let him in."  "You're not
paying enough attention to what was written and you're changing the
story," said the priest.  "According to the story, there are two
important things that the doorkeeper explains about access to the law,
one at the beginning, one at the end.  At one place he says he can't
allow him in now, and at the other he says this entrance was intended
for him alone.  If one of the statements contradicted the other you
would be right and the doorkeeper would have cheated the man from the
country.  But there is no contradiction.  On the contrary, the first
statement even hints at the second.  You could almost say the doorkeeper
went beyond his duty in that he offered the man some prospect of being
admitted in the future.  Throughout the story, his duty seems to have
been merely to turn the man away, and there are many commentators who
are surprised that the doorkeeper offered this hint at all, as he seems
to love exactitude and keeps strict guard over his position.  He stays
at his post for many years and doesn't close the gate until the very
end, he's very conscious of the importance of his service, as he says,
'I'm powerful,' he has respect for his superiors, as he says, 'I'm only
the lowliest of the doormen', he's not talkative, as through all these
years the only questions he asks are 'disinterested', he's not
corruptible, as when he's offered a gift he says, 'I'll only accept this
so that you don't think there's anything you've failed to do,' as far as
fulfilling his duty goes he can be neither ruffled nor begged, as it
says about the man that, 'he tires the doorkeeper with his requests',
even his external appearance suggests a pedantic character, the big
hooked nose and the long, thin, black tartar-beard.  How could any
doorkeeper be more faithful to his duty?  But in the doorkeeper's
character there are also other features which might be very useful for
those who seek entry to the law, and when he hinted at some possibility
in the future it always seemed to make it clear that he might even go
beyond his duty.  There's no denying he's a little simple minded, and
that makes him a little conceited.  Even if all he said about his power
and the power of the other doorkeepers and how not even he could bear
the sight of them - I say even if all these assertions are right, the
way he makes them shows that he's too simple and arrogant to understand
properly.  The commentators say about this that, 'correct understanding
of a matter and a misunderstanding of the same matter are not mutually
exclusive'.  Whether they're right or not, you have to concede that his
simplicity and arrogance, however little they show, do weaken his
function of guarding the entrance, they are defects in the doorkeeper's
character.  You also have to consider that the doorkeeper seems to be
friendly by nature, he isn't always just an official.  He makes a joke
right at the beginning, in that he invites the man to enter at the same
time as maintaining the ban on his entering, and then he doesn't send
him away but gives him, as it says in the text, a stool to sit on and
lets him stay by the side of the door.  The patience with which he puts
up with the man's requests through all these years, the little
questioning sessions, accepting the gifts, his politeness when he puts
up with the man cursing his fate even though it was the doorkeeper who
caused that fate - all these things seem to want to arouse our sympathy.
Not every doorkeeper would have behaved in the same way.  And finally,
he lets the man beckon him and he bends deep down to him so that he can
put his last question.  There's no more than some slight impatience -
the doorkeeper knows everything's come to its end - shown in the words,
'You're insatiable'.  There are many commentators who go even further in
explaining it in this way and think the words, 'you're insatiable' are
an expression of friendly admiration, albeit with some condescension.
However you look at it the figure of the doorkeeper comes out
differently from how you might think."  "You know the story better than
I do and you've known it for longer," said K.  They were silent for a
while.  And then K. said, "So you think the man was not cheated, do
you?"  "Don't get me wrong," said the priest, "I'm just pointing out the
different opinions about it.  You shouldn't pay too much attention to
people's opinions.  The text cannot be altered, and the various opinions
are often no more than an expression of despair over it.  There's even
one opinion which says it's the doorkeeper who's been cheated."  "That
does seem to take things too far," said K.  "How can they argue the
doorkeeper has been cheated?"  "Their argument," answered the priest,
"is based on the simplicity of the doorkeeper.  They say the doorkeeper
doesn't know the inside of the law, only the way into it where he just
walks up and down.  They see his ideas of what's inside the law as
rather childish, and suppose he's afraid himself of what he wants to
make the man frightened of.  Yes, he's more afraid of it than the man,
as the man wants nothing but to go inside the law, even after he's heard
about the terrible doormen there, in contrast to the doorkeeper who
doesn't want to go in, or at least we don't hear anything about it.  On
the other hand, there are those who say he must have already been inside
the law as he has been taken on into its service and that could only
have been done inside.  That can be countered by supposing he could have
been given the job of doorkeeper by somebody calling out from inside,
and that he can't have gone very far inside as he couldn't bear the
sight of the third doorkeeper.  Nor, through all those years, does the
story say the doorkeeper told the man anything about the inside, other
than his comment about the other doorkeepers.  He could have been
forbidden to do so, but he hasn't said anything about that either.  All
this seems to show he doesn't know anything about what the inside looks
like or what it means, and that that's why he's being deceived.  But
he's also being deceived by the man from the country as he's this man's
subordinate and doesn't know it.  There's a lot to indicate that he
treats the man as his subordinate, I expect you remember, but those who
hold this view would say it's very clear that he really is his
subordinate.   Above all, the free man is superior to the man who has to
serve another.  Now, the man really is free, he can go wherever he
wants, the only thing forbidden to him is entry into the law and, what's
more, there's only one man forbidding him to do so - the doorkeeper.  If
he takes the stool and sits down beside the door and stays there all his
life he does this of his own free will, there's nothing in the story to
say he was forced to do it.  On the other hand, the doorkeeper is kept
to his post by his employment, he's not allowed to go away from it and
it seems he's not allowed to go inside either, not even if he wanted to.
Also, although he's in the service of the law he's only there for this
one entrance, therefore he's there only in the service of this one man
who the door's intended for.  This is another way in which he's his
subordinate.  We can take it that he's been performing this somewhat
empty service for many years, through the whole of a man's life, as it
says that a man will come, that means someone old enough to be a man.
That means the doorkeeper will have to wait a long time before his
function is fulfilled, he will have to wait for as long as the man
liked, who came to the door of his own free will.  Even the end of the
doorkeeper's service is determined by when the man's life ends, so the
doorkeeper remains his subordinate right to the end.  And it's pointed
out repeatedly that the doorkeeper seems to know nothing of any of this,
although this is not seen as anything remarkable, as those who hold this
view see the doorkeeper as deluded in a way that's far worse, a way
that's to do with his service.  At the end, speaking about the entrance
he says, 'Now I'll go and close it', although at the beginning of the
story it says the door to the law is open as it always is, but if it's
always open - always - that means it's open independently of the
lifespan of the man it's intended for, and not even the doorkeeper will
be able to close it.  There are various opinions about this, some say
the doorkeeper was only answering a question or showing his devotion to
duty or, just when the man was in his last moments, the doorkeeper
wanted to cause him regret and sorrow.  There are many who agree that he
wouldn't be able to close the door.  They even believe, at the end at
least, the doorkeeper is aware, deep down, that he's the man's
subordinate, as the man sees the light that shines out of the entry to
the law whereas the doorkeeper would probably have his back to it and
says nothing at all to show there's been any change."  "That is well
substantiated," said K., who had been repeating some parts of the
priest's explanation to himself in a whisper.  "It is well
substantiated, and now I too think the doorkeeper must have been
deceived.  Although that does not mean I've abandoned what I thought
earlier as the two versions are, to some extent, not incompatible. It's
not clear whether the doorkeeper sees clearly or is deceived.  I said
the man had been cheated.  If the doorkeeper understands clearly, then
there could be some doubt about it, but if the doorkeeper has been
deceived then the man is bound to believe the same thing.  That would
mean the doorkeeper is not a cheat but so simple-minded that he ought to
be dismissed from his job immediately; if the doorkeeper is mistaken it
will do him no harm but the man will be harmed immensely."  "There
you've found another opinion," said the priest, "as there are many who
say the story doesn't give anyone the right to judge the doorkeeper.
However he might seem to us he is still in the service of the law, so he
belongs to the law, so he's beyond what man has a right to judge.  In
this case we can't believe the doorkeeper is the man's subordinate.
Even if he has to stay at the entrance into the law his service makes
him incomparably more than if he lived freely in the world.  The man has
come to the law for the first time and the doorkeeper is already there.
He's been given his position by the law, to doubt his worth would be to
doubt the law."  "I can't say I'm in complete agreement with this view,"
said K. shaking his head, "as if you accept it you'll have to accept
that everything said by the doorkeeper is true.  But you've already
explained very fully that that's not possible."  "No," said the priest,
"you don't need to accept everything as true, you only have to accept it
as necessary."  "Depressing view," said K.  "The lie made into the rule
of the world."

        K. said that as if it were his final word but it was not his
conclusion.  He was too tired to think about all the ramifications of
the story, and the sort of thoughts they led him into were not familiar
to him, unrealistic things, things better suited for officials of the
court to discuss than for him.  The simple story had lost its shape, he
wanted to shake it off, and the priest who now felt quite compassionate
allowed this and accepted K.'s remarks without comment, even though his
view was certainly very different from K.'s.

        In silence, they carried on walking for some time, K. stayed close
beside the priest without knowing where he was.  The lamp in his hand
had long since gone out.  Once, just in front of him, he thought he
could see the statue of a saint by the glitter of the silver on it,
although it quickly disappeared back into the darkness.  So that he
would not remain entirely dependent on the priest, K. asked him, "We're
now near the main entrance, are we?"  "No," said the priest, "we're a
long way from it.  Do you already want to go?"  K. had not thought of
going until then, but he immediately said,
"Yes, certainly, I have to go.  I'm the chief clerk in a bank and there
are people waiting for me, I only came here to show a foreign business
contact round the cathedral."  "Alright," said the priest offering him
his hand, "go then."  "But I can't find my way round in this darkness by
myself," said K.  "Go to your left as far as the wall," said the priest,
"then continue alongside the wall without leaving it and you'll find a
way out."  The priest had only gone a few paces from him, but K. was
already shouting loudly, "Please, wait!"  "I'm waiting," said the
priest.  "Is there anything else you want from me?" asked K.  "No," said
the priest.  "You were so friendly to me earlier on," said K., "and you
explained everything, but now you abandon me as if I were nothing to
you."  "You have to go," said the priest.
"Well, yes," said K., "you need to understand that."  "First, you need
to understand who I am," said the priest.  "You're the prison chaplain,"
said K., and went closer to the priest, it was not so important for him
to go straight back to the bank as he had made out, he could very well
stay where he was.  "So that means I belong to the court," said the
priest.  "So why would I want anything from you?  the court doesn't want
anything from you.  It accepts you when you come and it lets you go when
you leave."




Chapter Ten
End

        The evening before K.'s thirty-first birthday - it was about nine
o'clock in the evening, the time when the streets were quiet - two men
came to where he lived.  In frock coats, pale and fat, wearing top hats
that looked like they could not be taken off their heads.  After some
brief formalities at the door of the flat when they first arrived, the
same formalities were repeated at greater length at K.'s door.  He had
not been notified they would be coming, but K. sat in a chair near the
door, dressed in black as they were, and slowly put on new gloves which
stretched tightly over his fingers and behaved as if he were expecting
visitors.  He immediately stood up and looked at the gentlemen
inquisitively.  "You've come for me then, have you?" he asked.  The
gentlemen nodded, one of them indicated the other with the top hand now
in his hand.  K. told them he had been expecting a different visitor.
He went to the window and looked once more down at the dark street.
Most of the windows on the other side of the street were also dark
already, many of them had the curtains closed.  In one of the windows on
the same floor where there was a light on, two small children could be
seen playing with each other inside a playpen, unable to move from where
they were, reaching out for each other with their little hands.  "Some
ancient, unimportant actors - that's what they've sent for me," said K.
to himself, and looked round once again to confirm this to himself.
"They want to sort me out as cheaply as they can."  K. suddenly turned
round to face the two men and asked, "What theatre do you play in?"
"Theatre?" asked one of the gentlemen, turning to the other for
assistance and pulling in the corners of his mouth.  The other made a
gesture like someone who was dumb, as if he were struggling with some
organism causing him trouble.  "You're not properly prepared to answer
questions," said K. and went to fetch his hat.

        As soon as they were on the stairs the gentlemen wanted to take
K.'s arms, but K. said "Wait till we're in the street, I'm not ill."
But they waited only until the front door before they took his arms in a
way that K. had never experienced before.   They kept their shoulders
close behind his, did not turn their arms in but twisted them around the
entire length of K.'s arms and took hold of his hands with a grasp that
was formal, experienced and could not be resisted.  K. was held stiff
and upright between them, they formed now a single unit so that if any
one of them had been knocked down all of them must have fallen.  They
formed a unit of the sort that normally can be formed only by matter
that is lifeless.

        Whenever they passed under a lamp K. tried to see his companions
more clearly, as far as was possible when they were pressed so close
together, as in the dim light of his room this had been hardly possible.
"Maybe they're tenors," he thought as he saw their big double chins.
The cleanliness of their faces disgusted him.  He could see the hands
that cleaned them, passing over the corners of their eyes, rubbing at
their upper lips, scratching out the creases on those chins.

        When K. noticed that, he stopped, which meant the others had to
stop too; they were at the edge of an open square, devoid of people but
decorated with flower beds.  "Why did they send you, of all people!" he
cried out, more a shout than a question.  The two gentleman clearly knew
no answer to give, they waited, their free arms hanging down, like
nurses when the patient needs to rest.  "I will go no further," said K.
as if to see what would happen.  The gentlemen did not need to make any
answer, it was enough that they did not loosen their grip on K. and
tried to move him on, but K. resisted them.  "I'll soon have no need of
much strength, I'll use all of it now," he thought.   He thought of the
flies that tear their legs off struggling to get free of the flypaper.
"These gentleman will have some hard work to do".

        Just then, Miss Bürstner came up into the square in front of them
from the steps leading from a small street at a lower level.  It was not
certain that it was her, although the similarity was, of course, great.
But it did not matter to K. whether it was certainly her anyway, he just
became suddenly aware that there was no point in his resistance.  There
would be nothing heroic about it if he resisted, if he now caused
trouble for these gentlemen, if in defending himself he sought to enjoy
his last glimmer of life.  He started walking, which pleased the
gentlemen and some of their pleasure conveyed itself to him.  Now they
permitted him to decide which direction they took, and he decided to
take the direction that followed the young woman in front of them, not
so much because he wanted to catch up with her, nor even because he
wanted to keep her in sight for as long as possible, but only so that he
would not forget the reproach she represented for him.   "The only thing
I can do now," he said to himself, and his thought was confirmed by the
equal length of his own steps with the steps of the two others, "the
only thing I can do now is keep my common sense and do what's needed
right till the end.  I always wanted to go at the world and try and do
too much, and even to do it for something that was not too cheap.  That
was wrong of me.  Should I now show them I learned nothing from facing
trial for a year?  Should I go out like someone stupid?  Should I let
anyone say, after I'm gone, that at the start of the proceedings I
wanted to end them, and that now that they've ended I want to start them
again?  I don't want anyone to say that.  I'm grateful they sent these
unspeaking, uncomprehending men to go with me on this journey, and that
it's been left up to me to say what's necessary".

        Meanwhile, the young woman had turned off into a side street, but
K. could do without her now and let his companions lead him.  All three
of them now, in complete agreement, went over a bridge in the light of
the moon, the two gentlemen were willing to yield to each little
movement made by K. as he moved slightly towards the edge and directed
the group in that direction as a single unit.  The moonlight glittered
and quivered in the water, which divided itself around a small island
covered in a densely-piled mass of foliage and trees and bushes.
Beneath them, now invisible, there were gravel paths with comfortable
benches where K. had stretched himself out on many summer's days.  "I
didn't actually want to stop here," he said to his companions, shamed by
their compliance with his wishes.  Behind K.'s back one of them seemed
to quietly criticise the other for the misunderstanding about stopping,
and then they went on.  They went on up through several streets where
policemen were walking or standing here and there; some in the distance
and then some very close.   One of them with a bushy moustache, his hand
on the  grip of his sword, seemed to have some purpose in approaching
the group, which was hardly unsuspicious.  The two gentlemen stopped,
the policeman seemed about to open his mouth, and then K. drove his
group forcefully forward.  Several times he looked back cautiously to
see if the policeman was following; but when they had a corner between
themselves and the policeman K. began to run, and the two gentlemen,
despite being seriously short of breath, had to run with him.

        In this way they quickly left the built up area and found
themselves in the fields which, in this part of town, began almost
without any transition zone.   There was a quarry, empty and abandoned,
near a building which was still like those in the city.  Here the men
stopped, perhaps because this had always been their destination or
perhaps because they were too exhausted to run any further.  Here they
released their hold on K., who just waited in silence, and took their
top hats off while they looked round the quarry and wiped the sweat off
their brows with their handkerchiefs.  The moonlight lay everywhere with
the natural peace that is granted to no other light.

        After exchanging a few courtesies about who was to carry out the
next tasks - the gentlemen did not seem to have been allocated specific
functions - one of them went to K. and took his coat, his waistcoat, and
finally his shirt off him.  K. made an involuntary shiver, at which the
gentleman gave him a gentle, reassuring tap on the back.  Then he
carefully folded the things up as if they would still be needed, even if
not in the near future.  He did not want to expose K. to the chilly
night air without moving though, so he took him under the arm and walked
up and down with him a little way while the other gentleman looked round
the quarry for a suitable place.  When he had found it he made a sign
and the other gentleman escorted him there.  It was near the rockface,
there was a stone lying there that had broken loose.  The gentlemen sat
K. down on the ground, leant him against the stone and settled his head
down on the top of it.  Despite all the effort they went to, and despite
all the co-operation shown by K., his demeanour seemed very forced and
hard to believe.  So one of the gentlemen asked the other to grant him a
short time while he put K. in position by himself, but even that did
nothing to make it better.  In the end they left K. in a position that
was far from the best of the ones they had tried so far.  Then one of
the gentlemen opened his frock coat and from a sheath hanging on a belt
stretched across his waistcoat he withdrew a long, thin, double-edged
butcher's knife which he held up in the light to test its sharpness.
The repulsive courtesies began once again, one of them passed the knife
over K. to the other, who then passed it back over K. to the first.  K.
now knew it would be his duty to take the knife as it passed from hand
to hand above him and thrust it into himself.  But he did not do it,
instead he twisted his neck, which was still free, and looked around.
He was not able to show his full worth, was not able to take all the
work from the official bodies, he lacked the rest of the strength he
needed and this final shortcoming was the fault of whoever had denied it
to him.  As he looked round, he saw the top floor of the building next
to the quarry.  He saw how a light flickered on and the two halves of a
window opened out, somebody, made weak and thin by the height and the
distance, leant suddenly far out from it and stretched his arms out even
further.  Who was that?  A friend?  A good person?  Somebody who was
taking part?  Somebody who wanted to help?  Was he alone?  Was it
everyone?  Would anyone help?  Were there objections that had been
forgotten?  There must have been some.  The logic cannot be refuted, but
someone who wants to live will not resist it.  Where was the judge he'd
never seen?  Where was the high court he had never reached?  He raised
both hands and spread out all his fingers.

        But the hands of one of the gentleman were laid on K.'s throat,
while the other pushed the knife deep into his heart and twisted it
there, twice.  As his eyesight failed, K. saw the two gentlemen cheek by
cheek, close in front of his face, watching the result. "Like a dog!" he
said, it was as if the shame of it should outlive him.




The Jewel of Seven Stars


by

Bram Stoker




To Eleanor and Constance Hoyt




Contents


     I  A Summons in the Night
    II  Strange Instructions
   III  The Watchers
    IV  The Second Attempt
     V  More Strange Instructions
    VI  Suspicions
   VII  The Traveller’s Loss
  VIII  The Finding of the Lamps
    IX  The Need of Knowledge
     X  The Valley of the Sorcerer
    XI  A Queen’s Tomb
   XII  The Magic Coffer
  XIII  Awaking From the Trance
   XIV  The Birth-Mark
    XV  The Purpose of Queen Tera
   XVI  The Cavern
  XVII  Doubts and Fears
 XVIII  The Lesson of the “Ka”
   XIX  The Great Experiment




Chapter I

A Summons in the Night


It all seemed so real that I could hardly imagine that it had ever
occurred before; and yet each episode came, not as a fresh step in the
logic of things, but as something expected.  It is in such a wise that
memory plays its pranks for good or ill; for pleasure or pain; for weal
or woe.  It is thus that life is bittersweet, and that which has been
done becomes eternal.

Again, the light skiff, ceasing to shoot through the lazy water as when
the oars flashed and dripped, glided out of the fierce July sunlight
into the cool shade of the great drooping willow branches—I standing
up in the swaying boat, she sitting still and with deft fingers
guarding herself from stray twigs or the freedom of the resilience of
moving boughs.  Again, the water looked golden-brown under the canopy
of translucent green; and the grassy bank was of emerald hue.  Again,
we sat in the cool shade, with the myriad noises of nature both without
and within our bower merging into that drowsy hum in whose sufficing
environment the great world with its disturbing trouble, and its more
disturbing joys, can be effectually forgotten.  Again, in that blissful
solitude the young girl lost the convention of her prim, narrow
upbringing, and told me in a natural, dreamy way of the loneliness of
her new life. With an undertone of sadness she made me feel how in that
spacious home each one of the household was isolated by the personal
magnificence of her father and herself; that there confidence had no
altar, and sympathy no shrine; and that there even her father’s face
was as distant as the old country life seemed now.  Once more, the
wisdom of my manhood and the experience of my years laid themselves at
the girl’s feet.  It was seemingly their own doing; for the individual
“I” had no say in the matter, but only just obeyed imperative orders.
And once again the flying seconds multiplied themselves endlessly.  For
it is in the arcana of dreams that existences merge and renew
themselves, change and yet keep the same—like the soul of a musician
in a fugue.  And so memory swooned, again and again, in sleep.

It seems that there is never to be any perfect rest.  Even in Eden the
snake rears its head among the laden boughs of the Tree of Knowledge.
The silence of the dreamless night is broken by the roar of the
avalanche; the hissing of sudden floods; the clanging of the engine
bell marking its sweep through a sleeping American town; the clanking
of distant paddles over the sea....  Whatever it is, it is breaking the
charm of my Eden.  The canopy of greenery above us, starred with
diamond-points of light, seems to quiver in the ceaseless beat of
paddles; and the restless bell seems as though it would never cease....

All at once the gates of Sleep were thrown wide open, and my waking
ears took in the cause of the disturbing sounds.  Waking existence is
prosaic enough—there was somebody knocking and ringing at someone’s
street door.

I was pretty well accustomed in my Jermyn Street chambers to passing
sounds; usually I did not concern myself, sleeping or waking, with the
doings, however noisy, of my neighbours.  But this noise was too
continuous, too insistent, too imperative to be ignored.  There was
some active intelligence behind that ceaseless sound; and some stress
or need behind the intelligence.  I was not altogether selfish, and at
the thought of someone’s need I was, without premeditation, out of bed.
Instinctively I looked at my watch.  It was just three o’clock; there
was a faint edging of grey round the green blind which darkened my
room. It was evident that the knocking and ringing were at the door of
our own house; and it was evident, too, that there was no one awake to
answer the call.  I slipped on my dressing-gown and slippers, and went
down to the hall door. When I opened it there stood a dapper groom,
with one hand pressed unflinchingly on the electric bell whilst with
the other he raised a ceaseless clangour with the knocker.  The instant
he saw me the noise ceased; one hand went up instinctively to the brim
of his hat, and the other produced a letter from his pocket.  A neat
brougham was opposite the door, the horses were breathing heavily as
though they had come fast.  A policeman, with his night lantern still
alight at his belt, stood by, attracted to the spot by the noise.

“Beg pardon, sir, I’m sorry for disturbing you, but my orders was
imperative; I was not to lose a moment, but to knock and ring till
someone came.  May I ask you, sir, if Mr. Malcolm Ross lives here?”

“I am Mr. Malcolm Ross.”

“Then this letter is for you, sir, and the bro’am is for you too, sir!”

I took, with a strange curiosity, the letter which he handed to me.  As
a barrister I had had, of course, odd experiences now and then,
including sudden demands upon my time; but never anything like this.  I
stepped back into the hall, closing the door to, but leaving it ajar;
then I switched on the electric light.  The letter was directed in a
strange hand, a woman’s.  It began at once without “dear sir” or any
such address:

“You said you would like to help me if I needed it; and I believe you
meant what you said.  The time has come sooner than I expected.  I am
in dreadful trouble, and do not know where to turn, or to whom to
apply. An attempt has, I fear, been made to murder my Father; though,
thank God, he still lives.  But he is quite unconscious. The doctors
and police have been sent for; but there is no one here whom I can
depend on.  Come at once if you are able to; and forgive me if you can.
I suppose I shall realise later what I have done in asking such a
favour; but at present I cannot think.  Come!  Come at once! MARGARET
TRELAWNY.”

Pain and exultation struggled in my mind as I read; but the mastering
thought was that she was in trouble and had called on me—me!  My
dreaming of her, then, was not altogether without a cause.  I called
out to the groom:

“Wait!  I shall be with you in a minute!”  Then I flew upstairs.

A very few minutes sufficed to wash and dress; and we were soon driving
through the streets as fast as the horses could go.  It was market
morning, and when we got out on Piccadilly there was an endless stream
of carts coming from the west; but for the rest the roadway was clear,
and we went quickly.  I had told the groom to come into the brougham
with me so that he could tell me what had happened as we went along.
He sat awkwardly, with his hat on his knees as he spoke.

“Miss Trelawny, sir, sent a man to tell us to get out a carriage at
once; and when we was ready she come herself and gave me the letter and
told Morgan—the coachman, sir—to fly.  She said as I was to lose not
a second, but to keep knocking till someone come.”

“Yes, I know, I know—you told me!  What I want to know is, why she
sent for me. What happened in the house?”

“I don’t quite know myself, sir; except that master was found in his
room senseless, with the sheets all bloody, and a wound on his head. He
couldn’t be waked nohow. Twas Miss Trelawny herself as found him.”

“How did she come to find him at such an hour?  It was late in the
night, I suppose?”

“I don’t know, sir; I didn’t hear nothing at all of the details.”

As he could tell me no more, I stopped the carriage for a moment to let
him get out on the box; then I turned the matter over in my mind as I
sat alone.  There were many things which I could have asked the
servant; and for a few moments after he had gone I was angry with
myself for not having used my opportunity.  On second thought, however,
I was glad the temptation was gone.  I felt that it would be more
delicate to learn what I wanted to know of Miss Trelawny’s surroundings
from herself, rather than from her servants.

We bowled swiftly along Knightsbridge, the small noise of our
well-appointed vehicle sounding hollowly in the morning air.  We turned
up the Kensington Palace Road and presently stopped opposite a great
house on the left-hand side, nearer, so far as I could judge, the
Notting Hill than the Kensington end of the avenue.  It was a truly
fine house, not only with regard to size but to architecture.  Even in
the dim grey light of the morning, which tends to diminish the size of
things, it looked big.

Miss Trelawny met me in the hall.  She was not in any way shy.  She
seemed to rule all around her with a sort of high-bred dominance, all
the more remarkable as she was greatly agitated and as pale as snow.
In the great hall were several servants, the men standing together near
the hall door, and the women clinging together in the further corners
and doorways.  A police superintendent had been talking to Miss
Trelawny; two  men in uniform and one plain-clothes man stood near him.
As she took my hand impulsively there was a look of relief in her eyes,
and she gave a gentle sigh of relief.  Her salutation was simple.

“I knew you would come!”

The clasp of the hand can mean a great deal, even when it is not
intended to mean anything especially.  Miss Trelawny’s hand somehow
became lost in my own.  It was not that it was a small hand; it was
fine and flexible, with long delicate fingers—a rare and beautiful
hand; it was the unconscious self-surrender.  And though at the moment
I could not dwell on the cause of the thrill which swept me, it came
back to me later.

She turned and said to the police superintendent:

“This is Mr. Malcolm Ross.”  The police officer saluted as he answered:

“I know Mr. Malcolm Ross, miss.  Perhaps he will remember I had the
honour of working with him in the Brixton Coining case.”  I had not at
first glance noticed who it was, my whole attention having been taken
with Miss Trelawny.

“Of course, Superintendent Dolan, I remember very well!” I said as we
shook hands. I could not but note that the acquaintanceship seemed a
relief to Miss Trelawny. There was a certain vague uneasiness in her
manner which took my attention; instinctively I felt that it would be
less embarrassing for her to speak with me alone. So I said to the
Superintendent:

“Perhaps it will be better if Miss Trelawny will see me alone for a few
minutes.  You, of course, have already heard all she knows; and I shall
understand better how things are if I may ask some questions.  I will
then talk the matter over with you if I may.”

“I shall be glad to be of what service I can, sir,” he answered
heartily.

Following Miss Trelawny, I moved over to a dainty room which opened
from the hall and looked out on the garden at the back of the house.
When we had entered and I had closed the door she said:

“I will thank you later for your goodness in coming to me in my
trouble; but at present you can best help me when you know the facts.”

“Go on,” I said.  “Tell me all you know and spare no detail, however
trivial it may at the present time seem to be.”  She went on at once:

“I was awakened by some sound; I do not know what.  I only know that it
came through my sleep; for all at once I found myself awake, with my
heart beating wildly, listening anxiously for some sound from my
Father’s room.  My room is next Father’s, and I can often hear him
moving about before I fall asleep.  He works late at night, sometimes
very late indeed; so that when I wake early, as I do occasionally, or
in the grey of the dawn, I hear him still moving.  I tried once to
remonstrate with him about staying up so late, as it cannot be good for
him; but I never ventured to repeat the experiment.  You know how stern
and cold he can be—at least you may remember what I told you about
him; and when he is polite in this mood he is dreadful.  When he is
angry I can bear it much better; but when he is slow and deliberate,
and the side of his mouth lifts up to show the sharp teeth, I think I
feel—well, I don’t know how!  Last night I got up softly and stole to
the door, for I really feared to disturb him.  There was not any noise
of moving, and no kind of cry at all; but there was a queer kind of
dragging sound, and a slow, heavy breathing. Oh! it was dreadful,
waiting there in the dark and the silence, and fearing—fearing I did
not know what!

“At last I took my courage a deux mains, and turning the handle as
softly as I could, I opened the door a tiny bit.  It was quite dark
within; I could just see the outline of the windows.  But in the
darkness the sound of breathing, becoming more distinct, was appalling.
As I listened, this continued; but there was no other sound.  I pushed
the door open all at once.  I was afraid to open it slowly; I felt as
if there might be some dreadful thing behind it ready to pounce out on
me! Then I switched on the electric light, and stepped into the room.
I looked first at the bed.  The sheets were all crumpled up, so that I
knew Father had been in bed; but there was a great dark red patch in
the centre of the bed, and spreading to the edge of it, that made my
heart stand still.  As I was gazing at it the sound of the breathing
came across the room, and my eyes followed to it.  There was Father on
his right side with the other arm under him, just as if his dead body
had been thrown there all in a heap.  The track of blood went across
the room up to the bed, and there was a pool all around him which
looked terribly red and glittering as I bent over to examine him.  The
place where he lay was right in front of the big safe.  He was in his
pyjamas. The left sleeve was torn, showing his bare arm, and stretched
out toward the safe.  It looked—oh! so terrible, patched all with
blood, and with the flesh torn or cut all around a gold chain bangle on
his wrist.  I did not know he wore such a thing, and it seemed to give
me a new shock of surprise.”

She paused a moment; and as I wished to relieve her by a moment’s
divergence of thought, I said:

“Oh, that need not surprise you.  You will see the most unlikely men
wearing bangles.  I have seen a judge condemn a man to death, and the
wrist of the hand he held up had a gold bangle.”  She did not seem to
heed much the words or the idea; the pause, however, relieved her
somewhat, and she went on in a steadier voice:

“I did not lose a moment in summoning aid, for I feared he might bleed
to death.  I rang the bell, and then went out and called for help as
loudly as I could.  In what must have been a very short time—though it
seemed an incredibly long one to me—some of the servants came running
up; and then others, till the room seemed full of staring eyes, and
dishevelled hair, and night clothes of all sorts.

“We lifted Father on a sofa; and the housekeeper, Mrs. Grant, who
seemed to have her wits about her more than any of us, began to look
where the flow of blood came from.  In a few seconds it became apparent
that it came from the arm which was bare.  There was a deep wound—not
clean-cut as with a knife, but like a jagged rent or tear—close to the
wrist, which seemed to have cut into the vein.  Mrs. Grant tied a
handkerchief round the cut, and screwed it up tight with a silver
paper-cutter; and the flow of blood seemed to be checked at once.  By
this time I had come to my senses—or such of them as remained; and I
sent off one man for the doctor and another for the police.  When they
had gone, I felt that, except for the servants, I was all alone in the
house, and that I knew nothing—of my Father or anything else; and a
great longing came to me to have someone with me who could help me.
Then I thought of you and your kind offer in the boat under the
willow-tree; and, without waiting to think, I told the men to get a
carriage ready at once, and I scribbled a note and sent it on to you.”

She paused.  I did not like to say just then anything of how I felt.  I
looked at her; I think she understood, for her eyes were raised to mine
for a moment and then fell, leaving her cheeks as red as peony roses.
With a manifest effort she went on with her story:

“The Doctor was with us in an incredibly short time.  The groom had met
him letting himself into his house with his latchkey, and he came here
running.  He made a proper tourniquet for poor Father’s arm, and then
went home to get some appliances.  I dare say he will be back almost
immediately.  Then a policeman came, and sent a message to the station;
and very soon the Superintendent was here.  Then you came.”

There was a long pause, and I ventured to take her hand for an instant.
Without a word more we opened the door, and joined the Superintendent
in the hall.  He hurried up to us, saying as he came:

“I have been examining everything myself, and have sent off a message
to Scotland Yard.  You see, Mr. Ross, there seemed so much that was odd
about the case that I thought we had better have the best man of the
Criminal Investigation Department that we could get.  So I sent a note
asking to have Sergeant Daw sent at once.  You remember him, sir, in
that American poisoning case at Hoxton.”

“Oh yes,” I said, “I remember him well; in that and other cases, for I
have benefited several times by his skill and acumen.  He has a mind
that works as truly as any that I know.  When I have been for the
defence, and believed my man was innocent, I was glad to have him
against us!”

“That is high praise, sir!” said the Superintendent gratified:  “I am
glad you approve of my choice; that I did well in sending for him.”

I answered heartily:

“Could not be better.  I do not doubt that between you we shall get at
the facts—and what lies behind them!”

We ascended to Mr. Trelawny’s room, where we found everything exactly
as his daughter had described.

There came a ring at the house bell, and a minute later a man was shown
into the room.  A young man with aquiline features, keen grey eyes, and
a forehead that stood out square and broad as that of a thinker.  In
his hand he had a black bag which he at once opened.  Miss Trelawny
introduced us:  “Doctor Winchester, Mr. Ross, Superintendent Dolan.”
We bowed mutually, and he, without a moment’s delay, began his work.
We all waited, and eagerly watched him as he proceeded to dress the
wound. As he went on he turned now and again to call the
Superintendent’s attention to some point about the wound, the latter
proceeding to enter the fact at once in his notebook.

“See! several parallel cuts or scratches beginning on the left side of
the wrist and in some places endangering the radial artery.

“These small wounds here, deep and jagged, seem as if made with a blunt
instrument.  This in particular would seem as if made with some kind of
sharp wedge; the flesh round it seems torn as if with lateral pressure.”

Turning to Miss Trelawny he said presently:

“Do you think we might remove this bangle?  It is not absolutely
necessary, as it will fall lower on the wrist where it can hang
loosely; but it might add to the patient’s comfort later on.”  The poor
girl flushed deeply as she answered in a low voice:

“I do not know.  I—I have only recently come to live with my Father;
and I know so little of his life or his ideas that I fear I can hardly
judge in such a matter.  The Doctor, after a keen glance at her, said
in a very kindly way:

“Forgive me!  I did not know.  But in any case you need not be
distressed.  It is not required at present to move it.  Were it so I
should do so at once on my own responsibility.  If it be necessary
later on, we can easily remove it with a file.  Your Father doubtless
has some object in keeping it as it is.  See! there is a tiny key
attached to it....” As he was speaking he stopped and bent lower,
taking from my hand the candle which I held and lowering it till its
light fell on the bangle.  Then motioning me to hold the candle in the
same position, he took from his pocket a magnifying-glass which he
adjusted.  When he had made a careful examination he stood up and
handed the magnifying-glass to Dolan, saying as he did so:

“You had better examine it yourself.  That is no ordinary bangle.  The
gold is wrought over triple steel links; see where it is worn away.  It
is manifestly not meant to be removed lightly; and it would need more
than an ordinary file to do it.”

The Superintendent bent his great body; but not getting close enough
that way knelt down by the sofa as the Doctor had done.  He examined
the bangle minutely, turning it slowly round so that no particle of it
escaped observation. Then he stood up and handed the magnifying-glass
to me.  “When you have examined it yourself,” he said, “let the lady
look at it if she will,” and he commenced to write at length in his
notebook.

I made a simple alteration in his suggestion.  I held out the glass
toward Miss Trelawny, saying:

“Had you not better examine it first?”  She drew back, slightly raising
her hand in disclaimer, as she said impulsively:

“Oh no!  Father would doubtless have shown it to me had he wished me to
see it. I would not like to without his consent.”  Then she added,
doubtless fearing lest her delicacy of view should give offence to the
rest of us:

“Of course it is right that you should see it.  You have to examine and
consider everything; and indeed—indeed I am grateful to you...”

She turned away; I could see that she was crying quietly.  It was
evident to me that even in the midst of her trouble and anxiety there
was a chagrin that she knew so little of her father; and that her
ignorance had to be shown at such a time and amongst so many strangers.
That they were all men did not make the shame more easy to bear, though
there was a certain relief in it.  Trying to interpret her feelings I
could not but think that she must have been glad that no woman’s
eyes—of understanding greater than man’s—were upon her in that hour.

When I stood up from my examination, which verified to me that of the
Doctor, the latter resumed his place beside the couch and went on with
his ministrations. Superintendent Dolan said to me in a whisper:

“I think we are fortunate in our doctor!” I nodded, and was about to
add something in praise of his acumen, when there came a low tapping at
the door.




Chapter II

Strange Instructions


Superintendent Dolan went quietly to the door; by a sort of natural
understanding he had taken possession of affairs in the room.  The rest
of us waited.  He opened the door a little way; and then with a gesture
of manifest relief threw it wide, and a young man stepped in.  A young
man clean-shaven, tall and slight; with an eagle face and bright, quick
eyes that seemed to take in everything around him at a glance.  As he
came in, the Superintendent held out his hand; the two men shook hands
warmly.

“I came at once, sir, the moment I got your message.  I am glad I still
have your confidence.”

“That you’ll always have,” said the Superintendent heartily.  “I have
not forgotten our old Bow Street days, and I never shall!”  Then,
without a word of preliminary, he began to tell everything he knew up
to the moment of the newcomer’s entry. Sergeant Daw asked a few
questions—a very few—when it was necessary for his understanding of
circumstances or the relative positions of persons; but as a rule
Dolan, who knew his work thoroughly, forestalled every query, and
explained all necessary matters as he went on.  Sergeant Daw threw
occasionally swift glances round him; now at one of us; now at the room
or some part of it; now at the wounded man lying senseless on the sofa.

When the Superintendent had finished, the Sergeant turned to me and
said:

“Perhaps you remember me, sir.  I was with you in that Hoxton case.”

“I remember you very well,” I said as I held out my hand.  The
Superintendent spoke again:

“You understand, Sergeant Daw, that you are put in full charge of this
case.”

“Under you I hope, sir,” he interrupted.  The other shook his head and
smiled as he said:

“It seems to me that this is a case that will take all a man’s time and
his brains.  I have other work to do; but I shall be more than
interested, and if I can help in any possible way I shall be glad to do
so!”

“All right, sir,” said the other, accepting his responsibility with a
sort of modified salute; straightway he began his investigation.

First he came over to the Doctor and, having learned his name and
address, asked him to write a full report which he could use, and which
he could refer to headquarters if necessary.  Doctor Winchester bowed
gravely as he promised.  Then the Sergeant approached me and said sotto
voce:

“I like the look of your doctor.  I think we can work together!”
Turning to Miss Trelawny he asked:

“Please let me know what you can of your Father; his ways of life, his
history—in fact of anything of whatsoever kind which interests him, or
in which he may be concerned.”  I was about to interrupt to tell him
what she had already said of her ignorance in all matters of her father
and his ways, but her warning hand was raised to me pointedly and she
spoke herself.

“Alas!  I know little or nothing.  Superintendent Dolan and Mr. Ross
know already all I can say.”

“Well, ma’am, we must be content to do what we can,” said the officer
genially. “I’ll begin by making a minute examination.  You say that you
were outside the door when you heard the noise?”

“I was in my room when I heard the queer sound—indeed it must have
been the early part of whatever it was which woke me.  I came out of my
room at once. Father’s door was shut, and I could see the whole landing
and the upper slopes of the staircase.  No one could have left by the
door unknown to me, if that is what you mean!”

“That is just what I do mean, miss.  If every one who knows anything
will tell me as well as that, we shall soon get to the bottom of this.”

He then went over to the bed, looked at it carefully, and asked:

“Has the bed been touched?”

“Not to my knowledge,” said Miss Trelawny, “but I shall ask Mrs.
Grant—the housekeeper,” she added as she rang the bell.  Mrs. Grant
answered it in person. “Come in,” said Miss Trelawny.  “These gentlemen
want to know, Mrs. Grant, if the bed has been touched.”

“Not by me, ma’am.”

“Then,” said Miss Trelawny, turning to Sergeant Daw, “it cannot have
been touched by any one.  Either Mrs. Grant or I myself was here all
the time, and I do not think any of the servants who came when I gave
the alarm were near the bed at all.  You see, Father lay here just
under the great safe, and every one crowded round him.  We sent them
all away in a very short time.”  Daw, with a motion of his hand, asked
us all to stay at the other side of the room whilst with a
magnifying-glass he examined the bed, taking care as he moved each fold
of the bedclothes to replace it in exact position.  Then he examined
with his magnifying-glass the floor beside it, taking especial pains
where the blood had trickled over the side of the bed, which was of
heavy red wood handsomely carved. Inch by inch, down on his knees,
carefully avoiding any touch with the stains on the floor, he followed
the blood-marks over to the spot, close under the great safe, where the
body had lain.  All around and about this spot he went for a radius of
some yards; but seemingly did not meet with anything to arrest special
attention.  Then he examined the front of the safe; round the lock, and
along the bottom and top of the double doors, more especially at the
places of their touching in front.

Next he went to the windows, which were fastened down with the hasps.

“Were the shutters closed?” he asked Miss Trelawny in a casual way as
though he expected the negative answer, which came.

All this time Doctor Winchester was attending to his patient; now
dressing the wounds in the wrist or making minute examination all over
the head and throat, and over the heart.  More than once he put his
nose to the mouth of the senseless man and sniffed.  Each time he did
so he finished up by unconsciously looking round the room, as though in
search of something.

Then we heard the deep strong voice of the Detective:

“So far as I can see, the object was to bring that key to the lock of
the safe.  There seems to be some secret in the mechanism that I am
unable to guess at, though I served a year in Chubb’s before I joined
the police.  It is a combination lock of seven letters; but there seems
to be a way of locking even the combination.  It is one of Chatwood’s;
I shall call at their place and find out something about it.”  Then
turning to the Doctor, as though his own work were for the present
done, he said:

“Have you anything you can tell me at once, Doctor, which will not
interfere with your full report?  If there is any doubt I can wait, but
the sooner I know something definite the better.”  Doctor Winchester
answered at once:

“For my own part I see no reason in waiting.  I shall make a full
report of course.  But in the meantime I shall tell you all I
know—which is after all not very much, and all I think—which is less
definite.  There is no wound on the head which could account for the
state of stupor in which the patient continues.  I must, therefore,
take it that either he has been drugged or is under some hypnotic
influence.  So far as I can judge, he has not been drugged—at least by
means of any drug of whose qualities I am aware.  Of course, there is
ordinarily in this room so much of a mummy smell that it is difficult
to be certain about anything having a delicate aroma.  I dare say that
you have noticed the peculiar Egyptian scents, bitumen, nard, aromatic
gums and spices, and so forth. It is quite possible that somewhere in
this room, amongst the curios and hidden by stronger scents, is some
substance or liquid which may have the effect we see.  It is possible
that the patient has taken some drug, and that he may in some sleeping
phase have injured himself.  I do not think this is likely; and
circumstances, other than those which I have myself been investigating,
may prove that this surmise is not correct. But in the meantime it is
possible; and must, till it be disproved, be kept within our purview.”
Here Sergeant Daw interrupted:

“That may be, but if so, we should be able to find the instrument with
which the wrist was injured.  There would be marks of blood somewhere.”

“Exactly so!” said the Doctor, fixing his glasses as though preparing
for an argument. “But if it be that the patient has used some strange
drug, it may be one that does not take effect at once.  As we are as
yet ignorant of its potentialities—if, indeed, the whole surmise is
correct at all—we must be prepared at all points.”

Here Miss Trelawny joined in the conversation:

“That would be quite right, so far as the action of the drug was
concerned; but according to the second part of your surmise the wound
may have been self-inflicted, and this after the drug had taken effect.”

“True!” said the Detective and the Doctor simultaneously.  She went on:

“As however, Doctor, your guess does not exhaust the possibilities, we
must bear in mind that some other variant of the same root-idea may be
correct.  I take it, therefore, that our first search, to be made on
this assumption, must be for the weapon with which the injury was done
to my Father’s wrist.”

“Perhaps he put the weapon in the safe before he became quite
unconscious,” said I, giving voice foolishly to a half-formed thought.

“That could not be,” said the Doctor quickly.  “At least I think it
could hardly be,” he added cautiously, with a brief bow to me.  “You
see, the left hand is covered with blood; but there is no blood mark
whatever on the safe.”

“Quite right!” I said, and there was a long pause.

The first to break the silence was the Doctor.

“We shall want a nurse here as soon as possible; and I know the very
one to suit.  I shall go at once to get her if I can.  I must ask that
till I return some of you will remain constantly with the patient.  It
may be necessary to remove him to another room later on; but in the
meantime he is best left here.  Miss Trelawny, may I take it that
either you or Mrs. Grant will remain here—not merely in the room, but
close to the patient and watchful of him—till I return?”

She bowed in reply, and took a seat beside the sofa.  The Doctor gave
her some directions as to what she should do in case her father should
become conscious before his return.

The next to move was Superintendent Dolan, who came close to Sergeant
Daw as he said:

“I had better return now to the station—unless, of course, you should
wish me to remain for a while.”

He answered, “Is Johnny Wright still in your division?”

“Yes!  Would you like him to be with you?”  The other nodded reply.
“Then I will send him on to you as soon as can be arranged.  He shall
then stay with you as long as you wish.  I will tell him that he is to
take his instructions entirely from you.”

The Sergeant accompanied him to the door, saying as he went:

“Thank you, sir; you are always thoughtful for men who are working with
you.  It is a pleasure to me to be with you again.  I shall go back to
Scotland Yard and report to my chief.  Then I shall call at Chatwood’s;
and I shall return here as soon as possible. I suppose I may take it,
miss, that I may put up here for a day or two, if required.  It may be
some help, or possibly some comfort to you, if I am about, until we
unravel this mystery.”

“I shall be very grateful to you.”  He looked keenly at her for a few
seconds before he spoke again.

“Before I go have I permission to look about your Father’s table and
desk?  There might be something which would give us a clue—or a lead
at all events.”  Her answer was so unequivocal as almost to surprise
him.

“You have the fullest possible permission to do anything which may help
us in this dreadful trouble—to discover what it is that is wrong with
my Father, or which may shield him in the future!”

He began at once a systematic search of the dressing-table, and after
that of the writing-table in the room.  In one of the drawers he found
a letter sealed; this he brought at once across the room and handed to
Miss Trelawny.

“A letter—directed to me—and in my Father’s hand!” she said as she
eagerly opened it.  I watched her face as she began to read; but seeing
at once that Sergeant Daw kept his keen eyes on her face, unflinchingly
watching every flitting expression, I kept my eyes henceforth fixed on
his.  When Miss Trelawny had read her letter through, I had in my mind
a conviction, which, however, I kept locked in my own heart.  Amongst
the suspicions in the mind of the Detective was one, rather perhaps
potential than definite, of Miss Trelawny herself.

For several minutes Miss Trelawny held the letter in her hand with her
eyes downcast, thinking.  Then she read it carefully again; this time
the varying expressions were intensified, and I thought I could easily
follow them.  When she had finished the second reading, she paused
again.  Then, though with some reluctance, she handed the letter to the
Detective.  He read it eagerly but with unchanging face; read it a
second time, and then handed it back with a bow.  She paused a little
again, and then handed it to me.  As she did so she raised her eyes to
mine for a single moment appealingly; a swift blush spread over her
pale cheeks and forehead.

With mingled feelings I took it, but, all said, I was glad.  She did
not show any perturbation in giving the letter to the Detective—she
might not have shown any to anyone else.  But to me.... I feared to
follow the thought further; but read on, conscious that the eyes of
both Miss Trelawny and the Detective were fixed on me.


“MY DEAR DAUGHTER,  I want you to take this letter as an
instruction—absolute and imperative, and admitting of no deviation
whatever—in case anything untoward or unexpected by you or by others
should happen to me. If I should be suddenly and mysteriously stricken
down—either by sickness, accident or attack—you must follow these
directions implicitly.  If I am not already in my bedroom when you are
made cognisant of my state, I am to be brought there as quickly as
possible. Even should I be dead, my body is to be brought there.
Thenceforth, until I am either conscious and able to give instructions
on my own account, or buried, I am never to be left alone—not for a
single instant.  From nightfall to sunrise at least two persons must
remain in the room.  It will be well that a trained nurse be in the
room from time to time, and will note any symptoms, either permanent or
changing, which may strike her.  My solicitors, Marvin & Jewkes, of 27B
Lincoln’s Inn, have full instructions in case of my death; and Mr.
Marvin has himself undertaken to see personally my wishes carried out.
I should advise you, my dear Daughter, seeing that you have no relative
to apply to, to get some friend whom you can trust to either remain
within the house where instant communication can be made, or to come
nightly to aid in the watching, or to be within call.  Such friend may
be either male or female; but, whichever it may be, there should be
added one other watcher or attendant at hand of the opposite sex.
Understand, that it is of the very essence of my wish that there should
be, awake and exercising themselves to my purposes, both masculine and
feminine intelligences.  Once more, my dear Margaret, let me impress on
you the need for observation and just reasoning to conclusions,
howsoever strange.  If I am taken ill or injured, this will be no
ordinary occasion; and I wish to warn you, so that your guarding may be
complete.

“Nothing in my room—I speak of the curios—must be removed or
displaced in any way, or for any cause whatever.  I have a special
reason and a special purpose in the placing of each; so that any moving
of them would thwart my plans.

“Should you want money or counsel in anything, Mr. Marvin will carry
out your wishes; to the which he has my full instructions.”

          “ABEL TRELAWNY.”


I read the letter a second time before speaking, for I feared to betray
myself.  The choice of a friend might be a momentous occasion for me.
I had already ground for hope, that she had asked me to help her in the
first throe of her trouble; but love makes its own doubtings, and I
feared.  My thoughts seemed to whirl with lightning rapidity, and in a
few seconds a whole process of reasoning became formulated.  I must not
volunteer to be the friend that the father advised his daughter to have
to aid her in her vigil; and yet that one glance had a lesson which I
must not ignore.  Also, did not she, when she wanted help, send to
me—to me a stranger, except for one meeting at a dance and one brief
afternoon of companionship on the river?  Would it not humiliate her to
make her ask me twice?  Humiliate her!  No! that pain I could at all
events save her; it is not humiliation to refuse.  So, as I handed her
back the letter, I said:

“I know you will forgive me, Miss Trelawny, if I presume too much; but
if you will permit me to aid in the watching I shall be proud.  Though
the occasion is a sad one, I shall be so far happy to be allowed the
privilege.”

Despite her manifest and painful effort at self-control, the red tide
swept her face and neck.  Even her eyes seemed suffused, and in stern
contrast with her pale cheeks when the tide had rolled back.  She
answered in a low voice:

“I shall be very grateful for your help!”  Then in an afterthought she
added:

“But you must not let me be selfish in my need!  I know you have many
duties to engage you; and though I shall value your help highly—most
highly—it would not be fair to monopolise your time.”

“As to that,” I answered at once, “my time is yours.  I can for today
easily arrange my work so that I can come here in the afternoon and
stay till morning.  After that, if the occasion still demands it, I can
so arrange my work that I shall have more time still at my disposal.”

She was much moved.  I could see the tears gather in her eyes, and she
turned away her head.  The Detective spoke:

“I am glad you will be here, Mr. Ross.  I shall be in the house myself,
as Miss Trelawny will allow me, if my people in Scotland Yard will
permit.  That letter seems to put a different complexion on everything;
though the mystery remains greater than ever. If you can wait here an
hour or two I shall go to headquarters, and then to the safe-makers.
After that I shall return; and you can go away easier in your mind, for
I shall be here.”

When he had gone, we two, Miss Trelawny and I, remained in silence.  At
last she raised her eyes and looked at me for a moment; after that I
would not have exchanged places with a king.  For a while she busied
herself round the extemporised bedside of her father.  Then, asking me
to be sure not to take my eyes off him till she returned, she hurried
out.

In a few minutes she came back with Mrs. Grant and two maids and a
couple of men, who bore the entire frame and furniture of a light iron
bed.  This they proceeded to put together and to make.  When the work
was completed, and the servants had withdrawn, she said to me:

“It will be well to be all ready when the Doctor returns.  He will
surely want to have Father put to bed; and a proper bed will be better
for him than the sofa.”  She then got a chair close beside her father,
and sat down watching him.

I went about the room, taking accurate note of all I saw.  And truly
there were enough things in the room to evoke the curiosity of any
man—even though the attendant circumstances were less strange.  The
whole place, excepting those articles of furniture necessary to a
well-furnished bedroom, was filled with magnificent curios, chiefly
Egyptian. As the room was of immense size there was opportunity for the
placing of a large number of them, even if, as with these, they were of
huge proportions.

Whilst I was still investigating the room there came the sound of
wheels on the gravel outside the house.  There was a ring at the hall
door, and a few minutes later, after a preliminary tap at the door and
an answering “Come in!” Doctor Winchester entered, followed by a young
woman in the dark dress of a nurse.

“I have been fortunate!” he said as he came in.  “I found her at once
and free. Miss Trelawny, this is Nurse Kennedy!”




Chapter III

The Watchers


I was struck by the way the two young women looked at each other.  I
suppose I have been so much in the habit of weighing up in my own mind
the personality of witnesses and of forming judgment by their
unconscious action and mode of bearing themselves, that the habit
extends to my life outside as well as within the court-house.  At this
moment of my life anything that interested Miss Trelawny interested me;
and as she had been struck by the newcomer I instinctively weighed her
up also. By comparison of the two I seemed somehow to gain a new
knowledge of Miss Trelawny.  Certainly, the two women made a good
contrast.  Miss Trelawny was of fine figure; dark, straight-featured.
She had marvellous eyes; great, wide-open, and as black and soft as
velvet, with a mysterious depth.  To look in them was like gazing at a
black mirror such as Doctor Dee used in his wizard rites.  I heard an
old gentleman at the picnic, a great oriental traveller, describe the
effect of her eyes “as looking at night at the great distant lamps of a
mosque through the open door.”  The eyebrows were typical.  Finely
arched and rich in long curling hair, they seemed like the proper
architectural environment of the deep, splendid eyes.  Her hair was
black also, but was as fine as silk.  Generally black hair is a type of
animal strength and seems as if some strong expression of the forces of
a strong nature; but in this case there could be no such thought.
There were refinement and high breeding; and though there was no
suggestion of weakness, any sense of power there was, was rather
spiritual than animal.  The whole harmony of her being seemed complete.
Carriage, figure, hair, eyes; the mobile, full mouth, whose scarlet
lips and white teeth seemed to light up the lower part of the face—as
the eyes did the upper; the wide sweep of the jaw from chin to ear; the
long, fine fingers; the hand which seemed to move from the wrist as
though it had a sentience of its own.  All these perfections went to
make up a personality that dominated either by its grace, its
sweetness, its beauty, or its charm.

Nurse Kennedy, on the other hand, was rather under than over a woman’s
average height.  She was firm and thickset, with full limbs and broad,
strong, capable hands. Her colour was in the general effect that of an
autumn leaf.  The yellow-brown hair was thick and long, and the
golden-brown eyes sparkled from the freckled, sunburnt skin.  Her rosy
cheeks gave a general idea of rich brown.  The red lips and white teeth
did not alter the colour scheme, but only emphasized it.  She had a
snub nose—there was no possible doubt about it; but like such noses in
general it showed a nature generous, untiring, and full of good-nature.
Her broad white forehead, which even the freckles had spared, was full
of forceful thought and reason.

Doctor Winchester had on their journey from the hospital, coached her
in the necessary particulars, and without a word she took charge of the
patient and set to work.  Having examined the new-made bed and shaken
the pillows, she spoke to the Doctor, who gave instructions; presently
we all four, stepping together, lifted the unconscious man from the
sofa.

Early in the afternoon, when Sergeant Daw had returned, I called at my
rooms in Jermyn Street, and sent out such clothes, books and papers as
I should be likely to want within a few days.  Then I went on to keep
my legal engagements.

The Court sat late that day as an important case was ending; it was
striking six as I drove in at the gate of the Kensington Palace Road.
I found myself installed in a large room close to the sick chamber.

That night we were not yet regularly organised for watching, so that
the early part of the evening showed an unevenly balanced guard.  Nurse
Kennedy, who had been on duty all day, was lying down, as she had
arranged to come on again by twelve o’clock.  Doctor Winchester, who
was dining in the house, remained in the room until dinner was
announced; and went back at once when it was over.  During dinner Mrs.
Grant remained in the room, and with her Sergeant Daw, who wished to
complete a minute examination which he had undertaken of everything in
the room and near it.  At nine o’clock Miss Trelawny and I went in to
relieve the Doctor. She had lain down for a few hours in the afternoon
so as to be refreshed for her work at night.  She told me that she had
determined that for this night at least she would sit up and watch.  I
did not try to dissuade her, for I knew that her mind was made up.
Then and there I made up my mind that I would watch with her—unless,
of course, I should see that she really did not wish it.  I said
nothing of my intentions for the present.  We came in on tiptoe, so
silently that the Doctor, who was bending over the bed, did not hear
us, and seemed a little startled when suddenly looking up he saw our
eyes upon him.  I felt that the mystery of the whole thing was getting
on his nerves, as it had already got on the nerves of some others of
us.  He was, I fancied, a little annoyed with himself for having been
so startled, and at once began to talk in a hurried manner as though to
get over our idea of his embarrassment:

“I am really and absolutely at my wits’ end to find any fit cause for
this stupor.  I have made again as accurate an examination as I know
how, and I am satisfied that there is no injury to the brain, that is,
no external injury.  Indeed, all his vital organs seem unimpaired.  I
have given him, as you know, food several times and it has manifestly
done him good.  His breathing is strong and regular, and his pulse is
slower and stronger than it was this morning.  I cannot find evidence
of any known drug, and his unconsciousness does not resemble any of the
many cases of hypnotic sleep which I saw in the Charcot Hospital in
Paris.  And as to these wounds”—he laid his finger gently on the
bandaged wrist which lay outside the coverlet as he spoke, “I do not
know what to make of them.  They might have been made by a
carding-machine; but that supposition is untenable.  It is within the
bounds of possibility that they might have been made by a wild animal
if it had taken care to sharpen its claws.  That too is, I take it,
impossible. By the way, have you any strange pets here in the house;
anything of an exceptional kind, such as a tiger-cat or anything out of
the common?” Miss Trelawny smiled a sad smile which made my heart ache,
as she made answer:

“Oh no!  Father does not like animals about the house, unless they are
dead and mummied.”  This was said with a touch of bitterness—or
jealousy, I could hardly tell which.  “Even my poor kitten was only
allowed in the house on sufferance; and though he is the dearest and
best-conducted cat in the world, he is now on a sort of parole, and is
not allowed into this room.”

As she was speaking a faint rattling of the door handle was heard.
Instantly Miss Trelawny’s face brightened.  She sprang up and went over
to the door, saying as she went:

“There he is!  That is my Silvio.  He stands on his hind legs and
rattles the door handle when he wants to come into a room.”  She opened
the door, speaking to the cat as though he were a baby:  “Did him want
his movver?  Come then; but he must stay with her!”  She lifted the
cat, and came back with him in her arms.  He was certainly a
magnificent animal.  A chinchilla grey Persian with long silky hair; a
really lordly animal with a haughty bearing despite his gentleness; and
with great paws which spread out as he placed them on the ground.
Whilst she was fondling him, he suddenly gave a wriggle like an eel and
slipped out of her arms.  He ran across the room and stood opposite a
low table on which stood the mummy of an animal, and began to mew and
snarl.  Miss Trelawny was after him in an instant and lifted him in her
arms, kicking and struggling and wriggling to get away; but not biting
or scratching, for evidently he loved his beautiful mistress.  He
ceased to make a noise the moment he was in her arms; in a whisper she
admonished him:

“O you naughty Silvio!  You have broken your parole that mother gave
for you.  Now, say goodnight to the gentlemen, and come away to
mother’s room!”  As she was speaking she held out the cat’s paw to me
to shake. As I did so I could not but admire its size and beauty.
“Why,” said I, “his paw seems like a little boxing-glove full of
claws.”  She smiled:

“So it ought to.  Don’t you notice that my Silvio has seven toes, see!”
she opened the paw; and surely enough there were seven separate claws,
each of them sheathed in a delicate, fine, shell-like case.  As I
gently stroked the foot the claws emerged and one of them
accidentally—there was no anger now and the cat was purring—stuck
into my hand. Instinctively I said as I drew back:

“Why, his claws are like razors!”

Doctor Winchester had come close to us and was bending over looking at
the cat’s claws; as I spoke he said in a quick, sharp way:

“Eh!”  I could hear the quick intake of his breath.  Whilst I was
stroking the now quiescent cat, the Doctor went to the table and tore
off a piece of blotting-paper from the writing-pad and came back.  He
laid the paper on his palm and, with a simple “pardon me!” to Miss
Trelawny, placed the cat’s paw on it and pressed it down with his other
hand.  The haughty cat seemed to resent somewhat the familiarity, and
tried to draw its foot away.  This was plainly what the Doctor wanted,
for in the act the cat opened the sheaths of its claws and made
several reefs in the soft paper. Then Miss Trelawny took her pet away.
She returned in a couple of minutes; as she came in she said:

“It is most odd about that mummy!  When Silvio came into the room
first—indeed I took him in as a kitten to show to Father—he went on
just the same way.  He jumped up on the table, and tried to scratch and
bite the mummy.  That was what made Father so angry, and brought the
decree of banishment on poor Silvio.  Only his parole, given through
me, kept him in the house.”

Whilst she had been gone, Doctor Winchester had taken the bandage from
her father’s wrist.  The wound was now quite clear, as the separate
cuts showed out in fierce red lines.  The Doctor folded the
blotting-paper across the line of punctures made by the cat’s claws,
and held it down close to the wound.  As he did so, he looked up
triumphantly and beckoned us over to him.

The cuts in the paper corresponded with the wounds in the wrist!  No
explanation was needed, as he said:

“It would have been better if master Silvio had not broken his parole!”

We were all silent for a little while.  Suddenly Miss Trelawny said:

“But Silvio was not in here last night!”

“Are you sure?  Could you prove that if necessary?”  She hesitated
before replying:

“I am certain of it; but I fear it would be difficult to prove.  Silvio
sleeps in a basket in my room.  I certainly put him to bed last night;
I remember distinctly laying his little blanket over him, and tucking
him in.  This morning I took him out of the basket myself.  I certainly
never noticed him in here; though, of course, that would not mean much,
for I was too concerned about poor father, and too much occupied with
him, to notice even Silvio.”

The Doctor shook his head as he said with a certain sadness:

“Well, at any rate it is no use trying to prove anything now.  Any cat
in the world would have cleaned blood-marks—did any exist—from his
paws in a hundredth part of the time that has elapsed.”

Again we were all silent; and again the silence was broken by Miss
Trelawny:

“But now that I think of it, it could not have been poor Silvio that
injured Father. My door was shut when I first heard the sound; and
Father’s was shut when I listened at it.  When I went in, the injury
had been done; so that it must have been before Silvio could possibly
have got in.”  This reasoning commended itself, especially to me as a
barrister, for it was proof to satisfy a jury.  It gave me a distinct
pleasure to have Silvio acquitted of the crime—possibly because he was
Miss Trelawny’s cat and was loved by her.  Happy cat!  Silvio’s
mistress was manifestly pleased as I said:

“Verdict, ‘not guilty!’”  Doctor Winchester after a pause observed:

“My apologies to master Silvio on this occasion; but I am still puzzled
to know why he is so keen against that mummy.  Is he the same toward
the other mummies in the house?  There are, I suppose, a lot of them.
I saw three in the hall as I came in.”

“There are lots of them,” she answered.  “I sometimes don’t know
whether I am in a private house or the British Museum.  But Silvio
never concerns himself about any of them except that particular one.  I
suppose it must be because it is of an animal, not a man or a woman.”

“Perhaps it is of a cat!” said the Doctor as he started up and went
across the room to look at the mummy more closely.  “Yes,” he went on,
“it is the mummy of a cat; and a very fine one, too.  If it hadn’t been
a special favourite of some very special person it would never have
received so much honour.  See!  A painted case and obsidian eyes—just
like a human mummy.  It is an extraordinary thing, that knowledge of
kind to kind.  Here is a dead cat—that is all; it is perhaps four or
five thousand years old—and another cat of another breed, in what is
practically another world, is ready to fly at it, just as it would if
it were not dead.  I should like to experiment a bit about that cat if
you don’t mind, Miss Trelawny.”  She hesitated before replying:

“Of course, do anything you may think necessary or wise; but I hope it
will not be anything to hurt or worry my poor Silvio.”  The Doctor
smiled as he answered:

“Oh, Silvio would be all right:  it is the other one that my sympathies
would be reserved for.”

“How do you mean?”

“Master Silvio will do the attacking; the other one will do the
suffering.”

“Suffering?”  There was a note of pain in her voice.  The Doctor smiled
more broadly:

“Oh, please make your mind easy as to that.  The other won’t suffer as
we understand it; except perhaps in his structure and outfit.”

“What on earth do you mean?”

“Simply this, my dear young lady, that the antagonist will be a mummy
cat like this one.  There are, I take it, plenty of them to be had in
Museum Street.  I shall get one and place it here instead of that
one—you won’t think that a temporary exchange will violate your
Father’s instructions, I hope.  We shall then find out, to begin with,
whether Silvio objects to all mummy cats, or only to this one in
particular.”

“I don’t know,” she said doubtfully.  “Father’s instructions seem very
uncompromising.”  Then after a pause she went on:  “But of course under
the circumstances anything that is to be ultimately for his good must
be done.  I suppose there can’t be anything very particular about the
mummy of a cat.”

Doctor Winchester said nothing.  He sat rigid, with so grave a look on
his face that his extra gravity passed on to me; and in its
enlightening perturbation I began to realise more than I had yet done
the strangeness of the case in which I was now so deeply concerned.
When once this thought had begun there was no end to it.  Indeed it
grew, and blossomed, and reproduced itself in a thousand different
ways.  The room and all in it gave grounds for strange thoughts.  There
were so many ancient relics that unconsciously one was taken back to
strange lands and strange times.  There were so many mummies or mummy
objects, round which there seemed to cling for ever the penetrating
odours of bitumen, and spices and gums—“Nard and Circassia’s balmy
smells”—that one was unable to forget the past.  Of course, there was
but little light in the room, and that carefully shaded; so that there
was no glare anywhere. None of that direct light which can manifest
itself as a power or an entity, and so make for companionship.  The
room was a large one, and lofty in proportion to its size.  In its
vastness was place for a multitude of things not often found in a
bedchamber.  In far corners of the room were shadows of uncanny shape.
More than once as I thought, the multitudinous presence of the dead and
the past took such hold on me that I caught myself looking round
fearfully as though some strange personality or influence was present.
Even the manifest presence of Doctor Winchester and Miss Trelawny could
not altogether comfort or satisfy me at such moments.  It was with a
distinct sense of relief that I saw a new personality in the room in
the shape of Nurse Kennedy. There was no doubt that that business-like,
self-reliant, capable young woman added an element of security to such
wild imaginings as my own. She had a quality of common sense that
seemed to pervade everything around her, as though it were some kind of
emanation.  Up to that moment I had been building fancies around the
sick man; so that finally all about him, including myself, had become
involved in them, or enmeshed, or saturated, or.... But now that she had
come, he relapsed into his proper perspective as a patient; the room
was a sick-room, and the shadows lost their fearsome quality.  The only
thing which it could not altogether abrogate was the strange Egyptian
smell. You may put a mummy in a glass case and hermetically seal it so
that no corroding air can get within; but all the same it will exhale
its odour.  One might think that four or five thousand years would
exhaust the olfactory qualities of anything; but experience teaches us
that these smells remain, and that their secrets are unknown to us.
Today they are as much mysteries as they were when the embalmers put
the body in the bath of natron....


All at once I sat up.  I had become lost in an absorbing reverie.  The
Egyptian smell had seemed to get on my nerves—on my memory—on my very
will.

At that moment I had a thought which was like an inspiration.  If I was
influenced in such a manner by the smell, might it not be that the sick
man, who lived half his life or more in the atmosphere, had gradually
and by slow but sure process taken into his system something which had
permeated him to such degree that it had a new power derived from
quantity—or strength—or....

I was becoming lost again in a reverie.  This would not do.  I must
take such precaution that I could remain awake, or free from such
entrancing thought.  I had had but half a night’s sleep last night; and
this night I must remain awake.  Without stating my intention, for I
feared that I might add to the trouble and uneasiness of Miss Trelawny,
I went downstairs and out of the house.  I soon found a chemist’s shop,
and came away with a respirator.  When I got back, it was ten o’clock;
the Doctor was going for the night.  The Nurse came with him to the
door of the sick-room, taking her last instructions.  Miss Trelawny sat
still beside the bed.  Sergeant Daw, who had entered as the Doctor went
out, was some little distance off.

When Nurse Kennedy joined us, we arranged that she should sit up till
two o’clock, when Miss Trelawny would relieve her.  Thus, in accordance
with Mr. Trelawny’s instructions, there would always be a man and a
woman in the room; and each one of us would overlap, so that at no time
would a new set of watchers come on duty without some one to tell of
what—if anything—had occurred.  I lay down on a sofa in my own room,
having arranged that one of the servants should call me a little before
twelve.  In a few moments I was asleep.

When I was waked, it took me several seconds to get back my thoughts so
as to recognise my own identity and surroundings.  The short sleep had,
however, done me good, and I could look on things around me in a more
practical light than I had been able to do earlier in the evening.  I
bathed my face, and thus refreshed went into the sick-room.  I moved
very softly.  The Nurse was sitting by the bed, quiet and alert; the
Detective sat in an arm-chair across the room in deep shadow.  He did
not move when I crossed, until I got close to him, when he said in a
dull whisper:

“It is all right; I have not been asleep!”  An unnecessary thing to
say, I thought—it always is, unless it be untrue in spirit.  When I
told him that his watch was over; that he might go to bed till I should
call him at six o’clock, he seemed relieved and went with alacrity.  At
the door he turned and, coming back to me, said in a whisper:

“I sleep lightly and I shall have my pistols with me.  I won’t feel so
heavy-headed when I get out of this mummy smell.”

He too, then, had shared my experience of drowsiness!

I asked the Nurse if she wanted anything.  I noticed that she had a
vinaigrette in her lap.  Doubtless she, too, had felt some of the
influence which had so affected me. She said that she had all she
required, but that if she should want anything she would at once let me
know.  I wished to keep her from noticing my respirator, so I went to
the chair in the shadow where her back was toward me.  Here I quietly
put it on, and made myself comfortable.

For what seemed a long time, I sat and thought and thought.  It was a
wild medley of thoughts, as might have been expected from the
experiences of the previous day and night.  Again I found myself
thinking of the Egyptian smell; and I remember that I felt a delicious
satisfaction that I did not experience it as I had done.  The
respirator was doing its work.

It must have been that the passing of this disturbing thought made for
repose of mind, which is the corollary of bodily rest, for, though I
really cannot remember being asleep or waking from it, I saw a
vision—I dreamed a dream, I scarcely know which.

I was still in the room, seated in the chair.  I had on my respirator
and knew that I breathed freely.  The Nurse sat in her chair with her
back toward me.  She sat quite still.  The sick man lay as still as the
dead.  It was rather like the picture of a scene than the reality; all
were still and silent; and the stillness and silence were continuous.
Outside, in the distance I could hear the sounds of a city, the
occasional roll of wheels, the shout of a reveller, the far-away echo
of whistles and the rumbling of trains.  The light was very, very low;
the reflection of it under the green-shaded lamp was a dim relief to
the darkness, rather than light.  The green silk fringe of the lamp had
merely the colour of an emerald seen in the moonlight. The room, for
all its darkness, was full of shadows.  It seemed in my whirling
thoughts as though all the real things had become shadows—shadows
which moved, for they passed the dim outline of the high windows.
Shadows which had sentience. I even thought there was sound, a faint
sound as of the mew of a cat—the rustle of drapery and a metallic
clink as of metal faintly touching metal.  I sat as one entranced.  At
last I felt, as in nightmare, that this was sleep, and that in the
passing of its portals all my will had gone.

All at once my senses were full awake.  A shriek rang in my ears.  The
room was filled suddenly with a blaze of light.  There was the sound of
pistol shots—one, two; and a haze of white smoke in the room.  When my
waking eyes regained their power, I could have shrieked with horror
myself at what I saw before me.




Chapter IV

The Second Attempt


The sight which met my eyes had the horror of a dream within a dream,
with the certainty of reality added.  The room was as I had seen it
last; except that the shadowy look had gone in the glare of the many
lights, and every article in it stood stark and solidly real.

By the empty bed sat Nurse Kennedy, as my eyes had last seen her,
sitting bolt upright in the arm-chair beside the bed.  She had placed a
pillow behind her, so that her back might be erect; but her neck was
fixed as that of one in a cataleptic trance.  She was, to all intents
and purposes, turned into stone.  There was no special expression on
her face—no fear, no horror; nothing such as might be expected of one
in such a condition.  Her open eyes showed neither wonder nor interest.
She was simply a negative existence, warm, breathing, placid; but
absolutely unconscious of the world around her.  The bedclothes were
disarranged, as though the patient had been drawn from under them
without throwing them back.  The corner of the upper sheet hung upon
the floor; close by it lay one of the bandages with which the Doctor
had dressed the wounded wrist. Another and another lay further along
the floor, as though forming a clue to where the sick man now lay.
This was almost exactly where he had been found on the previous night,
under the great safe.  Again, the left arm lay toward the safe.  But
there had been a new outrage, an attempt had been made to sever the arm
close to the bangle which held the tiny key.  A heavy “kukri”
knife—one of the leaf-shaped knives which the Gurkhas and others of
the hill tribes of India use with such effect—had been taken from its
place on the wall, and with it the attempt had been made. It was
manifest that just at the moment of striking, the blow had been
arrested, for only the point of the knife and not the edge of the blade
had struck the flesh.  As it was, the outer side of the arm had been
cut to the bone and the blood was pouring out.  In addition, the former
wound in front of the arm had been cut or torn about terribly, one of
the cuts seemed to jet out blood as if with each pulsation of the
heart.  By the side of her father knelt Miss Trelawny, her white
nightdress stained with the blood in which she knelt.  In the middle of
the room Sergeant Daw, in his shirt and trousers and stocking feet, was
putting fresh cartridges into his revolver in a dazed mechanical kind
of way.  His eyes were red and heavy, and he seemed only half awake,
and less than half conscious of what was going on around him.  Several
servants, bearing lights of various kinds, were clustered round the
doorway.

As I rose from my chair and came forward, Miss Trelawny raised her eyes
toward me. When she saw me she shrieked and started to her feet,
pointing towards me.  Never shall I forget the strange picture she
made, with her white drapery all smeared with blood which, as she rose
from the pool, ran in streaks toward her bare feet.  I believe that I
had only been asleep; that whatever influence had worked on Mr.
Trelawny and Nurse Kennedy—and in less degree on Sergeant Daw—had not
touched me. The respirator had been of some service, though it had not
kept off the tragedy whose dire evidences were before me.  I can
understand now—I could understand even then—the fright, added to that
which had gone before, which my appearance must have evoked.  I had
still on the respirator, which covered mouth and nose; my hair had been
tossed in my sleep.  Coming suddenly forward, thus enwrapped and
dishevelled, in that horrified crowd, I must have had, in the strange
mixture of lights, an extraordinary and terrifying appearance.  It was
well that I recognised all this in time to avert another catastrophe;
for the half-dazed, mechanically-acting Detective put in the cartridges
and had raised his revolver to shoot at me when I succeeded in
wrenching off the respirator and shouting to him to hold his hand.  In
this also he acted mechanically; the red, half-awake eyes had not in
them even then the intention of conscious action.  The danger, however,
was averted.  The relief of the situation, strangely enough, came in a
simple fashion. Mrs. Grant, seeing that her young mistress had on only
her nightdress, had gone to fetch a dressing-gown, which she now threw
over her.  This simple act brought us all back to the region of fact.
With a long breath, one and all seemed to devote themselves to the most
pressing matter before us, that of staunching the flow of blood from
the arm of the wounded man.  Even as the thought of action came, I
rejoiced; for the bleeding was very proof that Mr. Trelawny still lived.

Last night’s lesson was not thrown away.  More than one of those
present knew now what to do in such an emergency, and within a few
seconds willing hands were at work on a tourniquet.  A man was at once
despatched for the doctor, and several of the servants disappeared to
make themselves respectable.  We lifted Mr. Trelawny on to the sofa
where he had lain yesterday; and, having done what we could for him,
turned our attention to the Nurse.  In all the turmoil she had not
stirred; she sat there as before, erect and rigid, breathing softly and
naturally and with a placid smile. As it was manifestly of no use to
attempt anything with her till the doctor had come, we began to think
of the general situation.

Mrs. Grant had by this time taken her mistress away and changed her
clothes; for she was back presently in a dressing-gown and slippers,
and with the traces of blood removed from her hands.  She was now much
calmer, though she trembled sadly; and her face was ghastly white.
When she had looked at her father’s wrist, I holding the tourniquet,
she turned her eyes round the room, resting them now and again on each
one of us present in turn, but seeming to find no comfort.  It was so
apparent to me that she did not know where to begin or whom to trust
that, to reassure her, I said:

“I am all right now; I was only asleep.”  Her voice had a gulp in it as
she said in a low voice:

“Asleep!  You! and my Father in danger!  I thought you were on the
watch!”  I felt the sting of justice in the reproach; but I really
wanted to help her, so I answered:

“Only asleep.  It is bad enough, I know; but there is something more
than an “only” round us here.  Had it not been that I took a definite
precaution I might have been like the Nurse there.”  She turned her
eyes swiftly on the weird figure, sitting grimly upright like a painted
statue; and then her face softened.  With the action of habitual
courtesy she said:

“Forgive me!  I did not mean to be rude.  But I am in such distress and
fear that I hardly know what I am saying.  Oh, it is dreadful!  I fear
for fresh trouble and horror and mystery every moment.”  This cut me to
the very heart, and out of the heart’s fulness I spoke:

“Don’t give me a thought!  I don’t deserve it.  I was on guard, and yet
I slept.  All that I can say is that I didn’t mean to, and I tried to
avoid it; but it was over me before I knew it.  Anyhow, it is done now;
and can’t be undone.  Probably some day we may understand it all; but
now let us try to get at some idea of what has happened.  Tell me what
you remember!”  The effort to recollect seemed to stimulate her; she
became calmer as she spoke:

“I was asleep, and woke suddenly with the same horrible feeling on me
that Father was in great and immediate danger.  I jumped up and ran,
just as I was, into his room.  It was nearly pitch dark, but as I
opened the door there was light enough to see Father’s nightdress as he
lay on the floor under the safe, just as on that first awful night.
Then I think I must have gone mad for a moment.”  She stopped and
shuddered. My eyes lit on Sergeant Daw, still fiddling in an aimless
way with the revolver.  Mindful of my work with the tourniquet, I said
calmly:

“Now tell us, Sergeant Daw, what did you fire at?”  The policeman
seemed to pull himself together with the habit of obedience.  Looking
around at the servants remaining in the room, he said with that air of
importance which, I take it, is the regulation attitude of an official
of the law before strangers:

“Don’t you think, sir, that we can allow the servants to go away?  We
can then better go into the matter.”  I nodded approval; the servants
took the hint and withdrew, though unwillingly, the last one closing
the door behind him.  Then the Detective went on:

“I think I had better tell you my impressions, sir, rather than recount
my actions. That is, so far as I remember them.”  There was a mortified
deference now in his manner, which probably arose from his
consciousness of the awkward position in which he found himself.  “I
went to sleep half-dressed—as I am now, with a revolver under my
pillow.  It was the last thing I remember thinking of.  I do not know
how long I slept.  I had turned off the electric light, and it was
quite dark.  I thought I heard a scream; but I can’t be sure, for I
felt thick-headed as a man does when he is called too soon after an
extra long stretch of work. Not that such was the case this time.
Anyhow my thoughts flew to the pistol.  I took it out, and ran on to
the landing.  Then I heard a sort of scream, or rather a call for help,
and ran into this room.  The room was dark, for the lamp beside the
Nurse was out, and the only light was that from the landing, coming
through the open door.  Miss Trelawny was kneeling on the floor beside
her father, and was screaming.  I thought I saw something move between
me and the window; so, without thinking, and being half dazed and only
half awake, I shot at it.  It moved a little more to the right between
the windows, and I shot again.  Then you came up out of the big chair
with all that muffling on your face.  It seemed to me, being as I say
half dazed and half awake—I know, sir, you will take this into
account—as if it had been you, being in the same direction as the
thing I had fired at.  And so I was about to fire again when you pulled
off the wrap.”  Here I asked him—I was cross-examining now and felt at
home:

“You say you thought I was the thing you fired at.  What thing?”  The
man scratched his head, but made no reply.

“Come, sir,” I said, “what thing; what was it like?”  The answer came
in a low voice:

“I don’t know, sir.  I thought there was something; but what it was, or
what it was like, I haven’t the faintest notion.  I suppose it was
because I had been thinking of the pistol before I went to sleep, and
because when I came in here I was half dazed and only half awake—which
I hope you will in future, sir, always remember.”  He clung to that
formula of excuse as though it were his sheet-anchor.  I did not want
to antagonise the man; on the contrary I wanted to have him with us.
Besides, I had on me at that time myself the shadow of my own default;
so I said as kindly as I knew how:

“Quite right! Sergeant.  Your impulse was correct; though of course in
the half-somnolent condition in which you were, and perhaps partly
affected by the same influence—whatever it may be—which made me sleep
and which has put the Nurse in that cataleptic trance, it could not be
expected that you would pause to weigh matters.  But now, whilst the
matter is fresh, let me see exactly where you stood and where I sat.
We shall be able to trace the course of your bullets.”  The prospect of
action and the exercise of his habitual skill seemed to brace him at
once; he seemed a different man as he set about his work.  I asked Mrs.
Grant to hold the tourniquet, and went and stood where he had stood and
looked where, in the darkness, he had pointed.  I could not but notice
the mechanical exactness of his mind, as when he showed me where he had
stood, or drew, as a matter of course, the revolver from his pistol
pocket, and pointed with it.  The chair from which I had risen still
stood in its place.  Then I asked him to point with his hand only, as I
wished to move in the track of his shot.

Just behind my chair, and a little back of it, stood a high buhl
cabinet.  The glass door was shattered.  I asked:

“Was this the direction of your first shot or your second?”  The answer
came promptly.

“The second; the first was over there!”

He turned a little to the left, more toward the wall where the great
safe stood, and pointed.  I followed the direction of his hand and came
to the low table whereon rested, amongst other curios, the mummy of the
cat which had raised Silvio’s ire.  I got a candle and easily found the
mark of the bullet.  It had broken a little glass vase and a tazza of
black basalt, exquisitely engraved with hieroglyphics, the graven lines
being filled with some faint green cement and the whole thing being
polished to an equal surface.  The bullet, flattened against the wall,
lay on the table.

I then went to the broken cabinet.  It was evidently a receptacle for
valuable curios; for in it were some great scarabs of gold, agate,
green jasper, amethyst, lapis lazuli, opal, granite, and blue-green
china. None of these things happily were touched.  The bullet had gone
through the back of the cabinet; but no other damage, save the
shattering of the glass, had been done.  I could not but notice the
strange arrangement of the curios on the shelf of the cabinet.  All the
scarabs, rings, amulets, &c. were arranged in an uneven oval round an
exquisitely-carved golden miniature figure of a hawk-headed God crowned
with a disk and plumes.  I did not wait to look further at present, for
my attention was demanded by more pressing things; but I determined to
make a more minute examination when I should have time.  It was evident
that some of the strange Egyptian smell clung to these old curios;
through the broken glass came an added whiff of spice and gum and
bitumen, almost stronger than those I had already noticed as coming
from others in the room.

All this had really taken but a few minutes.  I was surprised when my
eye met, through the chinks between the dark window blinds and the
window cases, the brighter light of the coming dawn.  When I went back
to the sofa and took the tourniquet from Mrs. Grant, she went over and
pulled up the blinds.

It would be hard to imagine anything more ghastly than the appearance
of the room with the faint grey light of early morning coming in upon
it. As the windows faced north, any light that came was a fixed grey
light without any of the rosy possibility of dawn which comes in the
eastern quarter of heaven.  The electric lights seemed dull and yet
glaring; and every shadow was of a hard intensity.  There was nothing
of morning freshness; nothing of the softness of night.  All was hard
and cold and inexpressibly dreary.  The face of the senseless man on
the sofa seemed of a ghastly yellow; and the Nurse’s face had taken a
suggestion of green from the shade of the lamp near her.  Only Miss
Trelawny’s face looked white; and it was of a pallor which made my
heart ache.  It looked as if nothing on God’s earth could ever again
bring back to it the colour of life and happiness.

It was a relief to us all when Doctor Winchester came in, breathless
with running.  He only asked one question:

“Can anyone tell me anything of how this wound was gotten?”  On seeing
the headshake which went round us under his glance, he said no more,
but applied himself to his surgical work.  For an instant he looked up
at the Nurse sitting so still; but then bent himself to his task, a
grave frown contracting his brows.  It was not till the arteries were
tied and the wounds completely dressed that he spoke again, except, of
course, when he had asked for anything to be handed to him or to be
done for him.  When Mr. Trelawny’s wounds had been thoroughly cared
for, he said to Miss Trelawny:

“What about Nurse Kennedy?”  She answered at once:

“I really do not know.  I found her when I came into the room at
half-past two o’clock, sitting exactly as she does now.  We have not
moved her, or changed her position.  She has not wakened since.  Even
Sergeant Daw’s pistol-shots did not disturb her.”

“Pistol-shots?  Have you then discovered any cause for this new
outrage?”  The rest were silent, so I answered:

“We have discovered nothing.  I was in the room watching with the
Nurse. Earlier in the evening I fancied that the mummy smells were
making me drowsy, so I went out and got a respirator.  I had it on when
I came on duty; but it did not keep me from going to sleep.  I awoke to
see the room full of people; that is, Miss Trelawny and Sergeant Daw,
being only half awake and still stupefied by the same scent or
influence which had affected us, fancied that he saw something moving
through the shadowy darkness of the room, and fired twice.  When I rose
out of my chair, with my face swathed in the respirator, he took me for
the cause of the trouble.  Naturally enough, he was about to fire
again, when I was fortunately in time to manifest my identity.  Mr.
Trelawny was lying beside the safe, just as he was found last night;
and was bleeding profusely from the new wound in his wrist.  We lifted
him on the sofa, and made a tourniquet.  That is, literally and
absolutely, all that any of us know as yet.  We have not touched the
knife, which you see lies close by the pool of blood. Look!” I said,
going over and lifting it. “The point is red with the blood which has
dried.”

Doctor Winchester stood quite still a few minutes before speaking:

“Then the doings of this night are quite as mysterious as those of last
night?”

“Quite!” I answered.  He said nothing in reply, but turning to Miss
Trelawny said:

“We had better take Nurse Kennedy into another room.  I suppose there
is nothing to prevent it?”

“Nothing!  Please, Mrs. Grant, see that Nurse Kennedy’s room is ready;
and ask two of the men to come and carry her in.”  Mrs. Grant went out
immediately; and in a few minutes came back saying:

“The room is quite ready; and the men are here.”  By her direction two
footmen came into the room and, lifting up the rigid body of Nurse
Kennedy under the supervision of the Doctor, carried her out of the
room.  Miss Trelawny remained with me in the sick chamber, and Mrs.
Grant went with the Doctor into the Nurse’s room.

When we were alone Miss Trelawny came over to me, and taking both my
hands in hers, said:

“I hope you won’t remember what I said.  I did not mean it, and I was
distraught.”  I did not make reply; but I held her hands and kissed
them.  There are different ways of kissing a lady’s hands.  This way
was intended as homage and respect; and it was accepted as such in the
high-bred, dignified way which marked Miss Trelawny’s bearing and every
movement.  I went over to the sofa and looked down at the senseless
man. The dawn had come much nearer in the last few minutes, and there
was something of the clearness of day in the light.  As I looked at the
stern, cold, set face, now as white as a marble monument in the pale
grey light, I could not but feel that there was some deep mystery
beyond all that had happened within the last twenty-six hours.  Those
beetling brows screened some massive purpose; that high, broad forehead
held some finished train of reasoning, which the broad chin and massive
jaw would help to carry into effect.  As I looked and wondered, there
began to steal over me again that phase of wandering thought which had
last night heralded the approach of sleep.  I resisted it, and held
myself sternly to the present.  This was easier to do when Miss
Trelawny came close to me, and, leaning her forehead against my
shoulder, began to cry silently.  Then all the manhood in me woke, and
to present purpose.  It was of little use trying to speak; words were
inadequate to thought. But we understood each other; she did not draw
away when I put arm protectingly over her shoulder as I used to do with
my little sister long ago when in her childish trouble she would come
to her big brother to be comforted.  That very act or attitude of
protection made me more resolute in my purpose, and seemed to clear my
brain of idle, dreamy wandering in thought.  With an instinct of
greater protection, however, I took away my arm as I heard the Doctor’s
footstep outside the door.

When Doctor Winchester came in he looked intently at the patient before
speaking. His brows were set, and his mouth was a thin, hard line.
Presently he said:

“There is much in common between the sleep of your Father and Nurse
Kennedy. Whatever influence has brought it about has probably worked
the same way in both cases.  In Kennedy’s case the coma is less marked.
I cannot but feel, however, that with her we may be able to do more and
more quickly than with this patient, as our hands are not tied.  I have
placed her in a draught; and already she shows some signs, though very
faint ones, of ordinary unconsciousness.  The rigidity of her limbs is
less, and her skin seems more sensitive—or perhaps I should say less
insensitive—to pain.”

“How is it, then,” I asked, “that Mr. Trelawny is still in this state
of insensibility; and yet, so far as we know, his body has not had such
rigidity at all?”

“That I cannot answer.  The problem is one which we may solve in a few
hours; or it may need a few days.  But it will be a useful lesson in
diagnosis to us all; and perhaps to many and many others after us, who
knows!” he added, with the genuine fire of an enthusiast.

As the morning wore on, he flitted perpetually between the two rooms,
watching anxiously over both patients.  He made Mrs. Grant remain with
the Nurse, but either Miss Trelawny or I, generally both of us,
remained with the wounded man. We each managed, however, to get bathed
and dressed; the Doctor and Mrs. Grant remained with Mr. Trelawny
whilst we had breakfast.

Sergeant Daw went off to report at Scotland Yard the progress of the
night; and then to the local station to arrange for the coming of his
comrade, Wright, as fixed with Superintendent Dolan.  When he returned
I could not but think that he had been hauled over the coals for
shooting in a sick-room; or perhaps for shooting at all without certain
and proper cause.  His remark to me enlightened me in the matter:

“A good character is worth something, sir, in spite of what some of
them say.  See! I’ve still got leave to carry my revolver.”

That day was a long and anxious one.  Toward nightfall Nurse Kennedy so
far improved that the rigidity of her limbs entirely disappeared.  She
still breathed quietly and regularly; but the fixed expression of her
face, though it was a calm enough expression, gave place to fallen
eyelids and the negative look of sleep. Doctor Winchester had, towards
evening, brought two more nurses, one of whom was to remain with Nurse
Kennedy and the other to share in the watching with Miss Trelawny, who
had insisted on remaining up herself.  She had, in order to prepare for
the duty, slept for several hours in the afternoon.  We had all taken
counsel together, and had arranged thus for the watching in Mr.
Trelawny’s room.  Mrs. Grant was to remain beside the patient till
twelve, when Miss Trelawny would relieve her.  The new nurse was to sit
in Miss Trelawny’s room, and to visit the sick chamber each quarter of
an hour.  The Doctor would remain till twelve; when I was to relieve
him.  One or other of the detectives was to remain within hail of the
room all night; and to pay periodical visits to see that all was well.
Thus, the watchers would be watched; and the possibility of such events
as last night, when the watchers were both overcome, would be avoided.

When the sun set, a strange and grave anxiety fell on all of us; and in
our separate ways we prepared for the vigil.  Doctor Winchester had
evidently been thinking of my respirator, for he told me he would go
out and get one.  Indeed, he took to the idea so kindly that I
persuaded Miss Trelawny also to have one which she could put on when
her time for watching came.

And so the night drew on.




Chapter V

More Strange Instructions


When I came from my room at half-past eleven o’clock I found all well
in the sick-room.  The new nurse, prim, neat, and watchful, sat in the
chair by the bedside where Nurse Kennedy had sat last night.  A little
way off, between the bed and the safe, sat Dr. Winchester alert and
wakeful, but looking strange and almost comic with the respirator over
mouth and nose.  As I stood in the doorway looking at them I heard a
slight sound; turning round I saw the new detective, who nodded, held
up the finger of silence and withdrew quietly.  Hitherto no one of the
watchers was overcome by sleep.

I took a chair outside the door.  As yet there was no need for me to
risk coming again under the subtle influence of last night.  Naturally
my thoughts went revolving round the main incidents of the last day and
night, and I found myself arriving at strange conclusions, doubts,
conjectures; but I did not lose myself, as on last night, in trains of
thought.  The sense of the present was ever with me, and I really felt
as should a sentry on guard.  Thinking is not a slow process; and when
it is earnest the time can pass quickly.  It seemed a very short time
indeed till the door, usually left ajar, was pulled open and Dr.
Winchester emerged, taking off his respirator as he came.  His act,
when he had it off, was demonstrative of his keenness.  He turned up
the outside of the wrap and smelled it carefully.

“I am going now,” he said.  “I shall come early in the morning; unless,
of course, I am sent for before.  But all seems well tonight.”

The next to appear was Sergeant Daw, who went quietly into the room and
took the seat vacated by the Doctor.  I still remained outside; but
every few minutes looked into the room.  This was rather a form than a
matter of utility, for the room was so dark that coming even from the
dimly-lighted corridor it was hard to distinguish anything.

A little before twelve o’clock Miss Trelawny came from her room.
Before coming to her father’s she went into that occupied by Nurse
Kennedy. After a couple of minutes she came out, looking, I thought, a
trifle more cheerful.  She had her respirator in her hand, but before
putting it on, asked me if anything special had occurred since she had
gone to lie down.  I answered in a whisper—there was no loud talking
in the house tonight—that all was safe, was well.  She then put on her
respirator, and I mine; and we entered the room.  The Detective and the
Nurse rose up, and we took their places.  Sergeant Daw was the last to
go out; he closed the door behind him as we had arranged.

For a while I sat quiet, my heart beating.  The place was grimly dark.
The only light was a faint one from the top of the lamp which threw a
white circle on the high ceiling, except the emerald sheen of the shade
as the light took its under edges. Even the light only seemed to
emphasize the blackness of the shadows.  These presently began to seem,
as on last night, to have a sentience of their own.  I did not myself
feel in the least sleepy; and each time I went softly over to look at
the patient, which I did about every ten minutes, I could see that Miss
Trelawny was keenly alert.  Every quarter of an hour one or other of
the policemen looked in through the partly opened door.  Each time both
Miss Trelawny and I said through our mufflers, “all right,” and the
door was closed again.

As the time wore on, the silence and the darkness seemed to increase.
The circle of light on the ceiling was still there, but it seemed less
brilliant than at first.  The green edging of the lamp-shade became
like Maori greenstone rather than emerald. The sounds of the night
without the house, and the starlight spreading pale lines along the
edges of the window-cases, made the pall of black within more solemn
and more mysterious.

We heard the clock in the corridor chiming the quarters with its silver
bell till two o’clock; and then a strange feeling came over me.  I
could see from Miss Trelawny’s movement as she looked round, that she
also had some new sensation.  The new detective had just looked in; we
two were alone with the unconscious patient for another quarter of an
hour.

My heart began to beat wildly.  There was a sense of fear over me.  Not
for myself; my fear was impersonal.  It seemed as though some new
person had entered the room, and that a strong intelligence was awake
close to me.  Something brushed against my leg.  I put my hand down
hastily and touched the furry coat of Silvio. With a very faint
far-away sound of a snarl he turned and scratched at me.  I felt blood
on my hand.  I rose gently and came over to the bedside.  Miss
Trelawny, too, had stood up and was looking behind her, as though there
was something close to her. Her eyes were wild, and her breast rose and
fell as though she were fighting for air. When I touched her she did
not seem to feel me; she worked her hands in front of her, as though
she was fending off something.

There was not an instant to lose.  I seized her in my arms and rushed
over to the door, threw it open, and strode into the passage, calling
loudly:

“Help!  Help!”

In an instant the two Detectives, Mrs. Grant, and the Nurse appeared on
the scene. Close on their heels came several of the servants, both men
and women. Immediately Mrs. Grant came near enough, I placed Miss
Trelawny in her arms, and rushed back into the room, turning up the
electric light as soon as I could lay my hand on it.  Sergeant Daw and
the Nurse followed me.

We were just in time.  Close under the great safe, where on the two
successive nights he had been found, lay Mr. Trelawny with his left
arm, bare save for the bandages, stretched out.  Close by his side was
a leaf-shaped Egyptian knife which had lain amongst the curios on the
shelf of the broken cabinet.  Its point was stuck in the parquet floor,
whence had been removed the blood-stained rug.

But there was no sign of disturbance anywhere; nor any sign of any one
or anything unusual.  The Policemen and I searched the room accurately,
whilst the Nurse and two of the servants lifted the wounded man back to
bed; but no sign or clue could we get.  Very soon Miss Trelawny
returned to the room.  She was pale but collected. When she came close
to me she said in a low voice:

“I felt myself fainting.  I did not know why; but I was afraid!”

The only other shock I had was when Miss Trelawny cried out to me, as I
placed my hand on the bed to lean over and look carefully at her father:

“You are wounded.  Look! look! your hand is bloody.  There is blood on
the sheets!” I had, in the excitement, quite forgotten Silvio’s
scratch. As I looked at it, the recollection came back to me; but
before I could say a word Miss Trelawny had caught hold of my hand and
lifted it up. When she saw the parallel lines of the cuts she cried out
again:

“It is the same wound as Father’s!”  Then she laid my hand down gently
but quickly, and said to me and to Sergeant Daw:

“Come to my room!  Silvio is there in his basket.”  We followed her,
and found Silvio sitting in his basket awake.  He was licking his paws.
The Detective said:

“He is there sure enough; but why licking his paws?”

Margaret—Miss Trelawny—gave a moan as she bent over and took one of
the forepaws in her hand; but the cat seemed to resent it and snarled.
At that Mrs. Grant came into the room.  When she saw that we were
looking at the cat she said:

“The Nurse tells me that Silvio was asleep on Nurse Kennedy’s bed ever
since you went to your Father’s room until a while ago.  He came there
just after you had gone to master’s room.  Nurse says that Nurse
Kennedy is moaning and muttering in her sleep as though she had a
nightmare.  I think we should send for Dr. Winchester.”

“Do so at once, please!” said Miss Trelawny; and we went back to the
room.

For a while Miss Trelawny stood looking at her father, with her brows
wrinkled. Then, turning to me, as though her mind were made up, she
said:

“Don’t you think we should have a consultation on Father?  Of course I
have every confidence in Doctor Winchester; he seems an immensely
clever young man.  But he is a young man; and there must be men who
have devoted themselves to this branch of science.  Such a man would
have more knowledge and more experience; and his knowledge and
experience might help to throw light on poor Father’s case. As it is,
Doctor Winchester seems to be quite in the dark.  Oh! I don’t know what
to do. It is all so terrible!”  Here she broke down a little and cried;
and I tried to comfort her.

Doctor Winchester arrived quickly.  His first thought was for his
patient; but when he found him without further harm, he visited Nurse
Kennedy.  When he saw her, a hopeful look came into his eyes.  Taking a
towel, he dipped a corner of it in cold water and flicked on the face.
The skin coloured, and she stirred slightly.  He said to the new
nurse—Sister Doris he called her:

“She is all right.  She will wake in a few hours at latest.  She may be
dizzy and distraught at first, or perhaps hysterical.  If so, you know
how to treat her.”

“Yes, sir!” answered Sister Doris demurely; and we went back to Mr.
Trelawny’s room. As soon as we had entered, Mrs. Grant and the Nurse
went out so that only Doctor Winchester, Miss Trelawny, and myself
remained in the room.  When the door had been closed Doctor Winchester
asked me as to what had occurred.  I told him fully, giving exactly
every detail so far as I could remember.  Throughout my narrative,
which did not take long, however, he kept asking me questions as to who
had been present and the order in which each one had come into the
room.  He asked other things, but nothing of any importance; these were
all that took my attention, or remained in my memory.  When our
conversation was finished, he said in a very decided way indeed, to
Miss Trelawny:

“I think, Miss Trelawny, that we had better have a consultation on this
case.”  She answered at once, seemingly a little to his surprise:

“I am glad you have mentioned it.  I quite agree.  Who would you
suggest?”

“Have you any choice yourself?” he asked.  “Any one to whom your Father
is known? Has he ever consulted any one?”

“Not to my knowledge.  But I hope you will choose whoever you think
would be best.  My dear Father should have all the help that can be
had; and I shall be deeply obliged by your choosing.  Who is the best
man in London—anywhere else—in such a case?”

“There are several good men; but they are scattered all over the world.
Somehow, the brain specialist is born, not made; though a lot of hard
work goes to the completing of him and fitting him for his work.  He
comes from no country.  The most daring investigator up to the present
is Chiuni, the Japanese; but he is rather a surgical experimentalist
than a practitioner.  Then there is Zammerfest of Uppsala, and Fenelon
of the University of Paris, and Morfessi of Naples.  These, of course,
are in addition to our own men, Morrison of Aberdeen and Richardson of
Birmingham. But before them all I would put Frere of King’s College.
Of all that I have named he best unites theory and practice.  He has no
hobbies—that have been discovered at all events; and his experience is
immense.  It is the regret of all of us who admire him that the nerve
so firm and the hand so dexterous must yield to time.  For my own part
I would rather have Frere than any one living.”

“Then,” said Miss Trelawny decisively, “let us have Doctor Frere—by
the way, is he ‘Doctor’ or ‘Mister’?—as early as we can get him in the
morning!”

A weight seemed removed from him, and he spoke with greater ease and
geniality than he had yet shown:

“He is Sir James Frere.  I shall go to him myself as early as it is
possible to see him, and shall ask him to come here at once.”  Then
turning to me he said:

“You had better let me dress your hand.”

“It is nothing,” I said.

“Nevertheless it should be seen to.  A scratch from any animal might
turn out dangerous; there is nothing like being safe.”  I submitted;
forthwith he began to dress my hand.  He examined with a
magnifying-glass the several parallel wounds, and compared them with
the slip of blotting-paper, marked with Silvio’s claws, which he took
from his pocket-book.  He put back the paper, simply remarking:

“It’s a pity that Silvio slips in—and out—just when he shouldn’t.”

The morning wore slowly on.  By ten o’clock Nurse Kennedy had so far
recovered that she was able to sit up and talk intelligibly.  But she
was still hazy in her thoughts; and could not remember anything that
had happened on the previous night, after her taking her place by the
sick-bed.  As yet she seemed neither to know nor care what had happened.

It was nearly eleven o’clock when Doctor Winchester returned with Sir
James Frere. Somehow I felt my heart sink when from the landing I saw
them in the hall below; I knew that Miss Trelawny was to have the pain
of telling yet another stranger of her ignorance of her father’s life.

Sir James Frere was a man who commanded attention followed by respect.
He knew so thoroughly what he wanted himself, that he placed at once on
one side all wishes and ideas of less definite persons.  The mere flash
of his piercing eyes, or the set of his resolute mouth, or the lowering
of his great eyebrows, seemed to compel immediate and willing obedience
to his wishes.  Somehow, when we had all been introduced and he was
well amongst us, all sense of mystery seemed to melt away.  It was with
a hopeful spirit that I saw him pass into the sick-room with Doctor
Winchester.

They remained in the room a long time; once they sent for the Nurse,
the new one, Sister Doris, but she did not remain long.  Again they
both went into Nurse Kennedy’s room.  He sent out the nurse attendant
on her. Doctor Winchester told me afterward that Nurse Kennedy, though
she was ignorant of later matters, gave full and satisfactory answers
to all Doctor Frere’s questions relating to her patient up to the time
she became unconscious.  Then they went to the study, where they
remained so long, and their voices raised in heated discussion seemed
in such determined opposition, that I began to feel uneasy.  As for
Miss Trelawny, she was almost in a state of collapse from nervousness
before they joined us.  Poor girl! she had had a sadly anxious time of
it, and her nervous strength had almost broken down.

They came out at last, Sir James first, his grave face looking as
unenlightening as that of the sphinx.  Doctor Winchester followed him
closely; his face was pale, but with that kind of pallor which looked
like a reaction.  It gave me the idea that it had been red not long
before.  Sir James asked that Miss Trelawny would come into the study.
He suggested that I should come also.  When we had entered, Sir James
turned to me and said:

“I understand from Doctor Winchester that you are a friend of Miss
Trelawny, and that you have already considerable knowledge of this
case. Perhaps it will be well that you should be with us.  I know you
already as a keen lawyer, Mr. Ross, though I never had the pleasure of
meeting you.  As Doctor Winchester tells me that there are some strange
matters outside this case which seem to puzzle him—and others—and in
which he thinks you may yet be specially interested, it might be as
well that you should know every phase of the case.  For myself I do not
take much account of mysteries—except those of science; and as there
seems to be some idea of an attempt at assassination or robbery, all I
can say is that if assassins were at work they ought to take some
elementary lessons in anatomy before their next job, for they seem
thoroughly ignorant.  If robbery were their purpose, they seem to have
worked with marvellous inefficiency.  That, however, is not my
business.”  Here he took a big pinch of snuff, and turning to Miss
Trelawny, went on: “Now as to the patient. Leaving out the cause of his
illness, all we can say at present is that he appears to be suffering
from a marked attack of catalepsy.  At present nothing can be done,
except to sustain his strength.  The treatment of my friend Doctor
Winchester is mainly such as I approve of; and I am confident that
should any slight change arise he will be able to deal with it
satisfactorily.  It is an interesting case—most interesting; and
should any new or abnormal development arise I shall be happy to come
at any time.  There is just one thing to which I wish to call your
attention; and I put it to you, Miss Trelawny, directly, since it is
your responsibility.  Doctor Winchester informs me that you are not
yourself free in the matter, but are bound by an instruction given by
your Father in case just such a condition of things should arise.  I
would strongly advise that the patient be removed to another room; or,
as an alternative, that those mummies and all such things should be
removed from his chamber.  Why, it’s enough to put any man into an
abnormal condition, to have such an assemblage of horrors round him,
and to breathe the atmosphere which they exhale.  You have evidence
already of how such mephitic odour may act.  That nurse—Kennedy, I
think you said, Doctor—isn’t yet out of her state of catalepsy; and
you, Mr. Ross, have, I am told, experienced something of the same
effects.  I know this”—here his eyebrows came down more than ever, and
his mouth hardened—“if I were in charge here I should insist on the
patient having a different atmosphere; or I would throw up the case.
Doctor Winchester already knows that I can only be again consulted on
this condition being fulfilled.  But I trust that you will see your
way, as a good daughter to my mind should, to looking to your Father’s
health and sanity rather than to any whim of his—whether supported or
not by a foregoing fear, or by any number of “penny dreadful”
mysteries.  The day has hardly come yet, I am glad to say, when the
British Museum and St. Thomas’s Hospital have exchanged their normal
functions.  Good-day, Miss Trelawny.  I earnestly hope that I may soon
see your Father restored.  Remember, that should you fulfil the
elementary condition which I have laid down, I am at your service day
or night.  Good-morning, Mr. Ross.  I hope you will be able to report
to me soon, Doctor Winchester.”

When he had gone we stood silent, till the rumble of his carriage
wheels died away. The first to speak was Doctor Winchester:

“I think it well to say that to my mind, speaking purely as a
physician, he is quite right.  I feel as if I could have assaulted him
when he made it a condition of not giving up the case; but all the same
he is right as to treatment.  He does not understand that there is
something odd about this special case; and he will not realise the knot
that we are all tied up in by Mr. Trelawny’s instructions.  Of
course—” He was interrupted by Miss Trelawny:

“Doctor Winchester, do you, too, wish to give up the case; or are you
willing to continue it under the conditions you know?”

“Give it up!  Less now than ever.  Miss Trelawny, I shall never give it
up, so long as life is left to him or any of us!”  She said nothing,
but held out her hand, which he took warmly.

“Now,” said she, “if Sir James Frere is a type of the cult of
Specialists, I want no more of them.  To start with, he does not seem
to know any more than you do about my Father’s condition; and if he
were a hundredth part as much interested in it as you are, he would not
stand on such punctilio.  Of course, I am only too anxious about my
poor Father; and if I can see a way to meet either of Sir James Frere’s
conditions, I shall do so.  I shall ask Mr. Marvin to come here today,
and advise me as to the limit of Father’s wishes.  If he thinks I am
free to act in any way on my own responsibility, I shall not hesitate
to do so.”  Then Doctor Winchester took his leave.

Miss Trelawny sat down and wrote a letter to Mr. Marvin, telling him of
the state of affairs, and asking him to come and see her and to bring
with him any papers which might throw any light on the subject.  She
sent the letter off with a carriage to bring back the solicitor; we
waited with what patience we could for his coming.

It is not a very long journey for oneself from Kensington Palace
Gardens to Lincoln’s Inn Fields; but it seemed endlessly long when
waiting for someone else to take it.  All things, however, are amenable
to Time; it was less than an hour all told when Mr. Marvin was with us.

He recognised Miss Trelawny’s impatience, and when he had learned
sufficient of her father’s illness, he said to her:

“Whenever you are ready I can go with you into particulars regarding
your Father’s wishes.”

“Whenever you like,” she said, with an evident ignorance of his
meaning. “Why not now?”  He looked at me, as to a fellow man of
business, and stammered out:

“We are not alone.”

“I have brought Mr. Ross here on purpose,” she answered.  “He knows so
much at present, that I want him to know more.”  The solicitor was a
little disconcerted, a thing which those knowing him only in courts
would hardly have believed.  He answered, however, with some hesitation:

“But, my dear young lady—Your Father’s wishes!—Confidence between
father and child—”

Here she interrupted him; there was a tinge of red in her pale cheeks
as she did so:

“Do you really think that applies to the present circumstances, Mr.
Marvin?  My Father never told me anything of his affairs; and I can
now, in this sad extremity, only learn his wishes through a gentleman
who is a stranger to me and of whom I never even heard till I got my
Father’s letter, written to be shown to me only in extremity.  Mr. Ross
is a new friend; but he has all my confidence, and I should like him to
be present.  Unless, of course,” she added, “such a thing is forbidden
by my Father.  Oh! forgive me, Mr. Marvin, if I seem rude; but I have
been in such dreadful trouble and anxiety lately, that I have hardly
command of myself.”  She covered her eyes with her hand for a few
seconds; we two men looked at each other and waited, trying to appear
unmoved.  She went on more firmly; she had recovered herself:

“Please! please do not think I am ungrateful to you for your kindness
in coming here and so quickly.  I really am grateful; and I have every
confidence in your judgment.  If you wish, or think it best, we can be
alone.”  I stood up; but Mr. Marvin made a dissentient gesture.  He was
evidently pleased with her attitude; there was geniality in his voice
and manner as he spoke:

“Not at all!  Not at all!  There is no restriction on your Father’s
part; and on my own I am quite willing.  Indeed, all told, it may be
better.  From what you have said of Mr. Trelawny’s illness, and the
other—incidental—matters, it will be well in case of any grave
eventuality, that it was understood from the first, that circumstances
were ruled by your Father’s own imperative instructions.  For, please
understand me, his instructions are imperative—most imperative.  They
are so unyielding that he has given me a Power of Attorney, under which
I have undertaken to act, authorising me to see his written wishes
carried out.  Please believe me once for all, that he intended fully
everything mentioned in that letter to you!  Whilst he is alive he is
to remain in his own room; and none of his property is to be removed
from it under any circumstances whatever.  He has even given an
inventory of the articles which are not to be displaced.”

Miss Trelawny was silent.  She looked somewhat distressed; so, thinking
that I understood the immediate cause, I asked:

“May we see the list?”  Miss Trelawny’s face at once brightened; but it
fell again as the lawyer answered promptly—he was evidently prepared
for the question:

“Not unless I am compelled to take action on the Power of Attorney.  I
have brought that instrument with me.  You will recognise, Mr.
Ross”—he said this with a sort of business conviction which I had
noticed in his professional work, as he handed me the deed—“how
strongly it is worded, and how the grantor made his wishes apparent in
such a way as to leave no loophole.  It is his own wording, except for
certain legal formalities; and I assure you I have seldom seen a more
iron-clad document.  Even I myself have no power to make the slightest
relaxation of the instructions, without committing a distinct breach of
faith.  And that, I need not tell you, is impossible.” He evidently
added the last words in order to prevent an appeal to his personal
consideration.  He did not like the seeming harshness of his words,
however, for he added:

“I do hope, Miss Trelawny, that you understand that I am
willing—frankly and unequivocally willing—to do anything I can,
within the limits of my power, to relieve your distress.  But your
Father had, in all his doings, some purpose of his own which he did not
disclose to me. So far as I can see, there is not a word of his
instructions that he had not thought over fully.  Whatever idea he had
in his mind was the idea of a lifetime; he had studied it in every
possible phase, and was prepared to guard it at every point.

“Now I fear I have distressed you, and I am truly sorry for it; for I
see you have much—too much—to bear already.  But I have no
alternative. If you want to consult me at any time about anything, I
promise you I will come without a moment’s delay, at any hour of the
day or night. There is my private address,” he scribbled in his
pocket-book as he spoke, “and under it the address of my club, where I
am generally to be found in the evening.”  He tore out the paper and
handed it to her.  She thanked him.  He shook hands with her and with
me and withdrew.

As soon as the hall door was shut on him, Mrs. Grant tapped at the door
and came in. There was such a look of distress in her face that Miss
Trelawny stood up, deadly white, and asked her:

“What is it, Mrs. Grant?  What is it?  Any new trouble?”

“I grieve to say, miss, that the servants, all but two, have given
notice and want to leave the house today.  They have talked the matter
over among themselves; the butler has spoken for the rest.  He says as
how they are willing to forego their wages, and even to pay their legal
obligations instead of notice; but that go today they must.”

“What reason do they give?”

“None, miss.  They say as how they’re sorry, but that they’ve nothing
to say.  I asked Jane, the upper housemaid, miss, who is not with the
rest but stops on; and she tells me confidential that they’ve got some
notion in their silly heads that the house is haunted!”

We ought to have laughed, but we didn’t.  I could not look in Miss
Trelawny’s face and laugh.  The pain and horror there showed no sudden
paroxysm of fear; there was a fixed idea of which this was a
confirmation.  For myself, it seemed as if my brain had found a voice.
But the voice was not complete; there was some other thought, darker
and deeper, which lay behind it, whose voice had not sounded as yet.




Chapter VI

Suspicions


The first to get full self-command was Miss Trelawny.  There was a
haughty dignity in her bearing as she said:

“Very well, Mrs. Grant; let them go!  Pay them up to today, and a
month’s wages. They have hitherto been very good servants; and the
occasion of their leaving is not an ordinary one.  We must not expect
much faithfulness from any one who is beset with fears.  Those who
remain are to have in future double wages; and please send these to me
presently when I send word.”  Mrs. Grant bristled with smothered
indignation; all the housekeeper in her was outraged by such generous
treatment of servants who had combined to give notice:

“They don’t deserve it, miss; them to go on so, after the way they have
been treated here.  Never in my life have I seen servants so well
treated or anyone so good to them and gracious to them as you have
been. They might be in the household of a King for treatment.  And now,
just as there is trouble, to go and act like this.  It’s abominable,
that’s what it is!”

Miss Trelawny was very gentle with her, and smothered her ruffled
dignity; so that presently she went away with, in her manner, a lesser
measure of hostility to the undeserving.  In quite a different frame of
mind she returned presently to ask if her mistress would like her to
engage a full staff of other servants, or at any rate try to do so.
“For you know, ma’am,” she went on, “when once a scare has been
established in the servants’ hall, it’s wellnigh impossible to get rid
of it.  Servants may come; but they go away just as quick.  There’s no
holding them.  They simply won’t stay; or even if they work out their
month’s notice, they lead you that life that you wish every hour of the
day that you hadn’t kept them.  The women are bad enough, the huzzies;
but the men are worse!”  There was neither anxiety nor indignation in
Miss Trelawny’s voice or manner as she said:

“I think, Mrs. Grant, we had better try to do with those we have.
Whilst my dear Father is ill we shall not be having any company, so
that there will be only three now in the house to attend to.  If those
servants who are willing to stay are not enough, I should only get
sufficient to help them to do the work.  It will not, I should think,
be difficult to get a few maids; perhaps some that you know already.
And please bear in mind, that those whom you get, and who are suitable
and will stay, are henceforth to have the same wages as those who are
remaining.  Of course, Mrs. Grant, you well enough understand that
though I do not group you in any way with the servants, the rule of
double salary applies to you too.”  As she spoke she extended her long,
fine-shaped hand, which the other took and then, raising it to her
lips, kissed it impressively with the freedom of an elder woman to a
younger. I could not but admire the generosity of her treatment of her
servants. In my mind I endorsed Mrs. Grant’s sotto voce remark as she
left the room:

“No wonder the house is like a King’s house, when the mistress is a
Princess!”

“A Princess!”  That was it.  The idea seemed to satisfy my mind, and to
bring back in a wave of light the first moment when she swept across my
vision at the ball in Belgrave Square.  A queenly figure! tall and
slim, bending, swaying, undulating as the lily or the lotos.  Clad in a
flowing gown of some filmy black material shot with gold. For ornament
in her hair she wore an old Egyptian jewel, a tiny crystal disk, set
between rising plumes carved in lapis lazuli.  On her wrist was a broad
bangle or bracelet of antique work, in the shape of a pair of spreading
wings wrought in gold, with the feathers made of coloured gems.  For
all her gracious bearing toward me, when our hostess introduced me, I
was then afraid of her.  It was only when later, at the picnic on the
river, I had come to realise her sweet and gentle, that my awe changed
to something else.

For a while she sat, making some notes or memoranda.  Then putting them
away, she sent for the faithful servants.  I thought that she had
better have this interview alone, and so left her.  When I came back
there were traces of tears in her eyes.

The next phase in which I had a part was even more disturbing, and
infinitely more painful.  Late in the afternoon Sergeant Daw came into
the study where I was sitting. After closing the door carefully and
looking all round the room to make certain that we were alone, he came
close to me.

“What is it?” I asked him.  “I see you wish to speak to me privately.”

“Quite so, sir!  May I speak in absolute confidence?”

“Of course you may.  In anything that is for the good of Miss
Trelawny—and of course Mr. Trelawny—you may be perfectly frank.  I
take it that we both want to serve them to the best of our powers.”  He
hesitated before replying:

“Of course you know that I have my duty to do; and I think you know me
well enough to know that I will do it.  I am a policeman—a detective;
and it is my duty to find out the facts of any case I am put on,
without fear or favour to anyone.  I would rather speak to you alone,
in confidence if I may, without reference to any duty of anyone to
anyone, except mine to Scotland Yard.”

“Of course! of course!” I answered mechanically, my heart sinking, I
did not know why.  “Be quite frank with me.  I assure you of my
confidence.”

“Thank you, sir.  I take it that what I say is not to pass beyond
you—not to anyone. Not to Miss Trelawny herself, or even to Mr.
Trelawny when he becomes well again.”

“Certainly, if you make it a condition!” I said a little more stiffly.
The man recognised the change in my voice or manner, and said
apologetically:

“Excuse me, sir, but I am going outside my duty in speaking to you at
all on the subject.  I know you, however, of old; and I feel that I can
trust you.  Not your word, sir, that is all right; but your discretion!”

I bowed.  “Go on!” I said.  He began at once:

“I have gone over this case, sir, till my brain begins to reel; but I
can’t find any ordinary solution of it.  At the time of each attempt no
one has seemingly come into the house; and certainly no one has got
out. What does it strike you is the inference?”

“That the somebody—or the something—was in the house already,” I
answered, smiling in spite of myself.

“That’s just what I think,” he said, with a manifest sigh of relief.
“Very well! Who can be that someone?”

“‘Someone, or something,’ was what I said,” I answered.

“Let us make it ‘someone,’ Mr. Ross!  That cat, though he might have
scratched or bit, never pulled the old gentleman out of bed, and tried
to get the bangle with the key off his arm.  Such things are all very
well in books where your amateur detectives, who know everything before
it’s done, can fit them into theories; but in Scotland Yard, where the
men aren’t all idiots either, we generally find that when crime is
done, or attempted, it’s people, not things, that are at the bottom of
it.”

“Then make it ‘people’ by all means, Sergeant.”

“We were speaking of ‘someone,’ sir.”

“Quite right.  Someone, be it!”

“Did it ever strike you, sir, that on each of the three separate
occasions where outrage was effected, or attempted, there was one
person who was the first to be present and to give the alarm?”

“Let me see!  Miss Trelawny, I believe, gave the alarm on the first
occasion.  I was present myself, if fast asleep, on the second; and so
was Nurse Kennedy.  When I woke there were several people in the room;
you were one of them.  I understand that on that occasion also Miss
Trelawny was before you.  At the last attempt I was Miss Trelawny
fainted.  I carried her out and went back.  In returning, I was first;
and I think you were close behind me.”

Sergeant Daw thought for a moment before replying:

“She was present, or first, in the room on all the occasions; there was
only damage done in the first and second!”

The inference was one which I, as a lawyer, could not mistake.  I
thought the best thing to do was to meet it half-way.  I have always
found that the best way to encounter an inference is to cause it to be
turned into a statement.

“You mean,” I said, “that as on the only occasions when actual harm was
done, Miss Trelawny’s being the first to discover it is a proof that
she did it; or was in some way connected with the attempt, as well as
the discovery?”

“I didn’t venture to put it as clear as that; but that is where the
doubt which I had leads.”  Sergeant Daw was a man of courage; he
evidently did not shrink from any conclusion of his reasoning on facts.

We were both silent for a while.  Fears began crowding in on my own
mind.  Not doubts of Miss Trelawny, or of any act of hers; but fears
lest such acts should be misunderstood.  There was evidently a mystery
somewhere; and if no solution to it could be found, the doubt would be
cast on someone.  In such cases the guesses of the majority are bound
to follow the line of least resistance; and if it could be proved that
any personal gain to anyone could follow Mr. Trelawny’s death, should
such ensue, it might prove a difficult task for anyone to prove
innocence in the face of suspicious facts.  I found myself
instinctively taking that deferential course which, until the plan of
battle of the prosecution is unfolded, is so safe an attitude for the
defence.  It would never do for me, at this stage, to combat any
theories which a detective might form. I could best help Miss Trelawny
by listening and understanding.  When the time should come for the
dissipation and obliteration of the theories, I should be quite willing
to use all my militant ardour, and all the weapons at my command.

“You will of course do your duty, I know,” I said, “and without fear.
What course do you intend to take?”

“I don’t know as yet, sir.  You see, up to now it isn’t with me even a
suspicion.  If any one else told me that that sweet young lady had a
hand in such a matter, I would think him a fool; but I am bound to
follow my own conclusions.  I know well that just as unlikely persons
have been proved guilty, when a whole court—all except the prosecution
who knew the facts, and the judge who had taught his mind to
wait—would have sworn to innocence.  I wouldn’t, for all the world,
wrong such a young lady; more especial when she has such a cruel weight
to bear.  And you will be sure that I won’t say a word that’ll prompt
anyone else to make such a charge.  That’s why I speak to you in
confidence, man to man.  You are skilled in proofs; that is your
profession.  Mine only gets so far as suspicions, and what we call our
own proofs—which are nothing but ex parte evidence after all.  You
know Miss Trelawny better than I do; and though I watch round the
sick-room, and go where I like about the house and in and out of it, I
haven’t the same opportunities as you have of knowing the lady and what
her life is, or her means are; or of anything else which might give me
a clue to her actions.  If I were to try to find out from her, it would
at once arouse her suspicions.  Then, if she were guilty, all
possibility of ultimate proof would go; for she would easily find a way
to baffle discovery.  But if she be innocent, as I hope she is, it
would be doing a cruel wrong to accuse her.  I have thought the matter
over according to my lights before I spoke to you; and if I have taken
a liberty, sir, I am truly sorry.”

“No liberty in the world, Daw,” I said warmly, for the man’s courage
and honesty and consideration compelled respect.  “I am glad you have
spoken to me so frankly. We both want to find out the truth; and there
is so much about this case that is strange—so strange as to go beyond
all experiences—that to aim at truth is our only chance of making
anything clear in the long-run—no matter what our views are, or what
object we wish to achieve ultimately!”  The Sergeant looked pleased as
he went on:

“I thought, therefore, that if you had it once in your mind that
somebody else held to such a possibility, you would by degrees get
proof; or at any rate such ideas as would convince yourself, either for
or against it.  Then we would come to some conclusion; or at any rate
we should so exhaust all other possibilities that the most likely one
would remain as the nearest thing to proof, or strong suspicion, that
we could get. After that we should have to—”

Just at this moment the door opened and Miss Trelawny entered the room.
The moment she saw us she drew back quickly, saying:

“Oh, I beg pardon!  I did not know you were here, and engaged.”  By the
time I had stood up, she was about to go back.

“Do come in,” I said; “Sergeant Daw and I were only talking matters
over.”

Whilst she was hesitating, Mrs. Grant appeared, saying as she entered
the room: “Doctor Winchester is come, miss, and is asking for you.”

I obeyed Miss Trelawny’s look; together we left the room.

When the Doctor had made his examination, he told us that there was
seemingly no change.  He added that nevertheless he would like to stay
in the house that night if he might.  Miss Trelawny looked glad, and
sent word to Mrs. Grant to get a room ready for him.  Later in the day,
when he and I happened to be alone together, he said suddenly:

“I have arranged to stay here tonight because I want to have a talk
with you.  And as I wish it to be quite private, I thought the least
suspicious way would be to have a cigar together late in the evening
when Miss Trelawny is watching her father.”  We still kept to our
arrangement that either the sick man’s daughter or I should be on watch
all night.  We were to share the duty at the early hours of the
morning. I was anxious about this, for I knew from our conversation
that the Detective would watch in secret himself, and would be
particularly alert about that time.

The day passed uneventfully.  Miss Trelawny slept in the afternoon; and
after dinner went to relieve the Nurse.  Mrs. Grant remained with her,
Sergeant Daw being on duty in the corridor.  Doctor Winchester and I
took our coffee in the library.  When we had lit our cigars he said
quietly:

“Now that we are alone I want to have a confidential talk.  We are
‘tiled,’ of course; for the present at all events?”

“Quite so!” I said, my heart sinking as I thought of my conversation
with Sergeant Daw in the morning, and of the disturbing and harrowing
fears which it had left in my mind.  He went on:

“This case is enough to try the sanity of all of us concerned in it.
The more I think of it, the madder I seem to get; and the two lines,
each continually strengthened, seem to pull harder in opposite
directions.”

“What two lines?”  He looked at me keenly for a moment before replying.
Doctor Winchester’s look at such moments was apt to be disconcerting.
It would have been so to me had I had a personal part, other than my
interest in Miss Trelawny, in the matter.  As it was, however, I stood
it unruffled.  I was now an attorney in the case; an amicus curiae in
one sense, in another retained for the defence.  The mere thought that
in this clever man’s mind were two lines, equally strong and opposite,
was in itself so consoling as to neutralise my anxiety as to a new
attack.  As he began to speak, the Doctor’s face wore an inscrutable
smile; this, however, gave place to a stern gravity as he proceeded:

“Two lines:  Fact and—Fancy!  In the first there is this whole thing;
attacks, attempts at robbery and murder; stupefyings; organised
catalepsy which points to either criminal hypnotism and thought
suggestion, or some simple form of poisoning unclassified yet in our
toxicology.  In the other there is some influence at work which is not
classified in any book that I know—outside the pages of romance.  I
never felt in my life so strongly the truth of Hamlet’s words:

     ‘There are more things in Heaven and earth....
     Than are dreamt of in your philosophy.’

“Let us take the ‘Fact’ side first.  Here we have a man in his home;
amidst his own household; plenty of servants of different classes in
the house, which forbids the possibility of an organised attempt made
from the servants’ hall.  He is wealthy, learned, clever.  From his
physiognomy there is no doubting that he is a man of iron will and
determined purpose.  His daughter—his only child, I take it, a young
girl bright and clever—is sleeping in the very next room to his.
There is seemingly no possible reason for expecting any attack or
disturbance of any kind; and no reasonable opportunity for any outsider
to effect it.  And yet we have an attack made; a brutal and remorseless
attack, made in the middle of the night.  Discovery is made quickly;
made with that rapidity which in criminal cases generally is found to
be not accidental, but of premeditated intent.  The attacker, or
attackers, are manifestly disturbed before the completion of their
work, whatever their ultimate intent may have been.  And yet there is
no possible sign of their escape; no clue, no disturbance of anything;
no open door or window; no sound.  Nothing whatever to show who had
done the deed, or even that a deed has been done; except the victim,
and his surroundings incidental to the deed!

“The next night a similar attempt is made, though the house is full of
wakeful people; and though there are on watch in the room and around it
a detective officer, a trained nurse, an earnest friend, and the man’s
own daughter.  The nurse is thrown into a catalepsy, and the watching
friend—though protected by a respirator—into a deep sleep.  Even the
detective is so far overcome with some phase of stupor that he fires
off his pistol in the sick-room, and can’t even tell what he thought he
was firing at.  That respirator of yours is the only thing that seems
to have a bearing on the ‘fact’ side of the affair.  That you did not
lose your head as the others did—the effect in such case being in
proportion to the amount of time each remained in the room—points to
the probability that the stupefying medium was not hypnotic, whatever
else it may have been.  But again, there is a fact which is
contradictory. Miss Trelawny, who was in the room more than any of
you—for she was in and out all the time and did her share of permanent
watching also—did not seem to be affected at all.  This would show
that the influence, whatever it is, does not affect generally—unless,
of course, it was that she was in some way inured to it.  If it should
turn out that it be some strange exhalation from some of those Egyptian
curios, that might account for it; only, we are then face to face with
the fact that Mr. Trelawny, who was most of all in the room—who, in
fact, lived more than half his life in it—was affected worst of all.
What kind of influence could it be which would account for all these
different and contradictory effects?  No! the more I think of this form
of the dilemma, the more I am bewildered!  Why, even if it were that
the attack, the physical attack, on Mr. Trelawny had been made by some
one residing in the house and not within the sphere of suspicion, the
oddness of the stupefyings would still remain a mystery.  It is not
easy to put anyone into a catalepsy.  Indeed, so far as is known yet in
science, there is no way to achieve such an object at will.  The crux
of the whole matter is Miss Trelawny, who seems to be subject to none
of the influences, or possibly of the variants of the same influence at
work.  Through all she goes unscathed, except for that one slight
semi-faint.  It is most strange!”

I listened with a sinking heart; for, though his manner was not
illuminative of distrust, his argument was disturbing.  Although it was
not so direct as the suspicion of the Detective, it seemed to single
out Miss Trelawny as different from all others concerned; and in a
mystery to be alone is to be suspected, ultimately if not immediately.
I thought it better not to say anything.  In such a case silence is
indeed golden; and if I said nothing now I might have less to defend,
or explain, or take back later.  I was, therefore, secretly glad that
his form of putting his argument did not require any answer from
me—for the present, at all events. Doctor Winchester did not seem to
expect any answer—a fact which, when I recognised it, gave me
pleasure, I hardly knew why.  He paused for a while, sitting with his
chin in his hand, his eyes staring at vacancy, whilst his brows were
fixed.  His cigar was held limp between his fingers; he had apparently
forgotten it.  In an even voice, as though commencing exactly where he
had left off, he resumed his argument:

“The other horn of the dilemma is a different affair altogether; and if
we once enter on it we must leave everything in the shape of science
and experience behind us.  I confess that it has its fascinations for
me; though at every new thought I find myself romancing in a way that
makes me pull up suddenly and look facts resolutely in the face.  I
sometimes wonder whether the influence or emanation from the sick-room
at times affects me as it did the others—the Detective, for instance.
Of course it may be that if it is anything chemical, any drug, for
example, in vaporeal form, its effects may be cumulative.  But then,
what could there be that could produce such an effect?  The room is, I
know, full of mummy smell; and no wonder, with so many relics from the
tomb, let alone the actual mummy of that animal which Silvio attacked.
By the way, I am going to test him tomorrow; I have been on the trace
of a mummy cat, and am to get possession of it in the morning.  When I
bring it here we shall find out if it be a fact that racial instinct
can survive a few thousand years in the grave.  However, to get back to
the subject in hand.  These very mummy smells arise from the presence
of substances, and combinations of substances, which the Egyptian
priests, who were the learned men and scientists of their time, found
by the experience of centuries to be strong enough to arrest the
natural forces of decay. There must be powerful agencies at work to
effect such a purpose; and it is possible that we may have here some
rare substance or combination whose qualities and powers are not
understood in this later and more prosaic age.  I wonder if Mr.
Trelawny has any knowledge, or even suspicion, of such a kind?  I only
know this for certain, that a worse atmosphere for a sick chamber could
not possibly be imagined; and I admire the courage of Sir James Frere
in refusing to have anything to do with a case under such conditions.
These instructions of Mr. Trelawny to his daughter, and from what you
have told me, the care with which he has protected his wishes through
his solicitor, show that he suspected something, at any rate. Indeed,
it would almost seem as if he expected something to happen.... I wonder
if it would be possible to learn anything about that!  Surely his
papers would show or suggest something.... It is a difficult matter to
tackle; but it might have to be done.  His present condition cannot go
on for ever; and if anything should happen there would have to be an
inquest.  In such case full examination would have to be made into
everything.... As it stands, the police evidence would show a murderous
attack more than once repeated.  As no clue is apparent, it would be
necessary to seek one in a motive.”

He was silent.  The last words seemed to come in a lower and lower tone
as he went on.  It had the effect of hopelessness.  It came to me as a
conviction that now was my time to find out if he had any definite
suspicion; and as if in obedience to some command, I asked:

“Do you suspect anyone?”  He seemed in a way startled rather than
surprised as he turned his eyes on me:

“Suspect anyone?  Any thing, you mean.  I certainly suspect that there
is some influence; but at present my suspicion is held within such
limit.  Later on, if there be any sufficiently definite conclusion to
my reasoning, or my thinking—for there are not proper data for
reasoning—I may suspect; at present however—”

He stopped suddenly and looked at the door.  There was a faint sound as
the handle turned.  My own heart seemed to stand still.  There was over
me some grim, vague apprehension.  The interruption in the morning,
when I was talking with the Detective, came back upon me with a rush.

The door opened, and Miss Trelawny entered the room.

When she saw us, she started back; and a deep flush swept her face.
For a few seconds she paused; at such a time a few succeeding seconds
seem to lengthen in geometrical progression.  The strain upon me, and,
as I could easily see, on the Doctor also, relaxed as she spoke:

“Oh, forgive me, I did not know that you were engaged.  I was looking
for you, Doctor Winchester, to ask you if I might go to bed tonight
with safety, as you will be here.  I feel so tired and worn-out that I
fear I may break down; and tonight I would certainly not be of any
use.”  Doctor Winchester answered heartily:

“Do!  Do go to bed by all means, and get a good night’s sleep.  God
knows! you want it.  I am more than glad you have made the suggestion,
for I feared when I saw you tonight that I might have you on my hands a
patient next.”

She gave a sigh of relief, and the tired look seemed to melt from her
face.  Never shall I forget the deep, earnest look in her great,
beautiful black eyes as she said to me:

“You will guard Father tonight, won’t you, with Doctor Winchester?  I
am so anxious about him that every second brings new fears.  But I am
really worn-out; and if I don’t get a good sleep, I think I shall go
mad.  I will change my room for tonight. I’m afraid that if I stay so
close to Father’s room I shall multiply every sound into a new terror.
But, of course, you will have me waked if there be any cause.  I shall
be in the bedroom of the little suite next the boudoir off the hall.  I
had those rooms when first I came to live with Father, and I had no
care then.... It will be easier to rest there; and perhaps for a few
hours I may forget.  I shall be all right in the morning.  Good-night!”

When I had closed the door behind her and come back to the little table
at which we had been sitting, Doctor Winchester said:

“That poor girl is overwrought to a terrible degree.  I am delighted
that she is to get a rest.  It will be life to her; and in the morning
she will be all right.  Her nervous system is on the verge of a
breakdown.  Did you notice how fearfully disturbed she was, and how red
she got when she came in and found us talking?  An ordinary thing like
that, in her own house with her own guests, wouldn’t under normal
circumstances disturb her!”

I was about to tell him, as an explanation in her defence, how her
entrance was a repetition of her finding the Detective and myself alone
together earlier in the day, when I remembered that that conversation
was so private that even an allusion to it might be awkward in evoking
curiosity.  So I remained silent.

We stood up to go to the sick-room; but as we took our way through the
dimly-lighted corridor I could not help thinking, again and again, and
again—ay, and for many a day after—how strange it was that she had
interrupted me on two such occasions when touching on such a theme.

There was certainly some strange web of accidents, in whose meshes we
were all involved.




Chapter VII

The Traveller’s Loss


That night everything went well.  Knowing that Miss Trelawny herself
was not on guard, Doctor Winchester and I doubled our vigilance.  The
Nurses and Mrs. Grant kept watch, and the Detectives made their visit
each quarter of an hour.  All night the patient remained in his trance.
He looked healthy, and his chest rose and fell with the easy breathing
of a child.  But he never stirred; only for his breathing he might have
been of marble.  Doctor Winchester and I wore our respirators, and
irksome they were on that intolerably hot night.  Between midnight and
three o’clock I felt anxious, and had once more that creepy feeling to
which these last few nights had accustomed me; but the grey of the
dawn, stealing round the edges of the blinds, came with inexpressible
relief, followed by restfulness, went through the household.  During
the hot night my ears, strained to every sound, had been almost
painfully troubled; as though my brain or sensoria were in anxious
touch with them.  Every breath of the Nurse or the rustle of her dress;
every soft pat of slippered feet, as the Policeman went his rounds;
every moment of watching life, seemed to be a new impetus to
guardianship.  Something of the same feeling must have been abroad in
the house; now and again I could hear upstairs the sound of restless
feet, and more than once downstairs the opening of a window.  With the
coming of the dawn, however, all this ceased, and the whole household
seemed to rest. Doctor Winchester went home when Sister Doris came to
relieve Mrs. Grant.  He was, I think, a little disappointed or
chagrined that nothing of an exceptional nature had happened during his
long night vigil.

At eight o’clock Miss Trelawny joined us, and I was amazed as well as
delighted to see how much good her night’s sleep had done her.  She was
fairly radiant; just as I had seen her at our first meeting and at the
picnic.  There was even a suggestion of colour in her cheeks, which,
however, looked startlingly white in contrast with her black brows and
scarlet lips.  With her restored strength, there seemed to have come a
tenderness even exceeding that which she had at first shown to her sick
father.  I could not but be moved by the loving touches as she fixed
his pillows and brushed the hair from his forehead.

I was wearied out myself with my long spell of watching; and now that
she was on guard I started off to bed, blinking my tired eyes in the
full light and feeling the weariness of a sleepless night on me all at
once.

I had a good sleep, and after lunch I was about to start out to walk to
Jermyn Street, when I noticed an importunate man at the hall door.  The
servant in charge was the one called Morris, formerly the “odd man,”
but since the exodus of the servants promoted to be butler pro tem.
The stranger was speaking rather loudly, so that there was no
difficulty in understanding his grievance.  The servant man was
respectful in both words and demeanour; but he stood squarely in front
of the great double door, so that the other could not enter.  The first
words which I heard from the visitor sufficiently explained the
situation:

“That’s all very well, but I tell you I must see Mr. Trelawny!  What is
the use of your saying I can’t, when I tell you I must.  You put me
off, and off, and off!  I came here at nine; you said then that he was
not up, and that as he was not well he could not be disturbed.  I came
at twelve; and you told me again he was not up.  I asked then to see
any of his household; you told me that Miss Trelawny was not up.  Now I
come again at three, and you tell me he is still in bed, and is not
awake yet.  Where is Miss Trelawny?  ‘She is occupied and must not be
disturbed!’  Well, she must be disturbed!  Or some one must.  I am here
about Mr. Trelawny’s special business; and I have come from a place
where servants always begin by saying No.  ‘No’ isn’t good enough for
me this time!  I’ve had three years of it, waiting outside doors and
tents when it took longer to get in than it did into the tombs; and
then you would think, too, the men inside were as dead as the mummies.
I’ve had about enough of it, I tell you.  And when I come home, and
find the door of the man I’ve been working for barred, in just the same
way and with the same old answers, it stirs me up the wrong way.  Did
Mr. Trelawny leave orders that he would not see me when I should come?”

He paused and excitedly mopped his forehead.  The servant answered very
respectfully:

“I am very sorry, sir, if in doing my duty I have given any offence.
But I have my orders, and must obey them.  If you would like to leave
any message, I will give it to Miss Trelawny; and if you will leave
your address, she can communicate with you if she wishes.”  The answer
came in such a way that it was easy to see that the speaker was a
kind-hearted man, and a just one.

“My good fellow, I have no fault to find with you personally; and I am
sorry if I have hurt your feelings.  I must be just, even if I am
angry. But it is enough to anger any man to find himself in the
position I am. Time is pressing.  There is not an hour—not a
minute—to lose!  And yet here I am, kicking my heels for six hours;
knowing all the time that your master will be a hundred times angrier
than I am, when he hears how the time has been fooled away.  He would
rather be waked out of a thousand sleeps than not see me just at
present—and before it is too late.  My God! it’s simply dreadful,
after all I’ve gone through, to have my work spoiled at the last and be
foiled in the very doorway by a stupid flunkey!  Is there no one with
sense in the house; or with authority, even if he hasn’t got sense?  I
could mighty soon convince him that your master must be awakened; even
if he sleeps like the Seven Sleepers—”

There was no mistaking the man’s sincerity, or the urgency and
importance of his business; from his point of view at any rate.  I
stepped forward.

“Morris,” I said, “you had better tell Miss Trelawny that this
gentleman wants to see her particularly.  If she is busy, ask Mrs.
Grant to tell her.”

“Very good, sir!” he answered in a tone of relief, and hurried away.

I took the stranger into the little boudoir across the hall.  As we
went he asked me:

“Are you the secretary?”

“No!  I am a friend of Miss Trelawny’s.  My name is Ross.”

“Thank you very much, Mr. Ross, for your kindness!” he said.  “My name
is Corbeck.  I would give you my card, but they don’t use cards where
I’ve come from.  And if I had had any, I suppose they, too, would have
gone last night—”

He stopped suddenly, as though conscious that he had said too much.  We
both remained silent; as we waited I took stock of him.  A short,
sturdy man, brown as a coffee-berry; possibly inclined to be fat, but
now lean exceedingly.  The deep wrinkles in his face and neck were not
merely from time and exposure; there were those unmistakable signs
where flesh or fat has fallen away, and the skin has become loose.  The
neck was simply an intricate surface of seams and wrinkles, and
sun-scarred with the burning of the Desert.  The Far East, the Tropic
Seasons, and the Desert—each can have its colour mark.  But all three
are quite different; and an eye which has once known, can thenceforth
easily distinguish them.  The dusky pallor of one; the fierce red-brown
of the other; and of the third, the dark, ingrained burning, as though
it had become a permanent colour.  Mr. Corbeck had a big head, massive
and full; with shaggy, dark red-brown hair, but bald on the temples.
His forehead was a fine one, high and broad; with, to use the terms of
physiognomy, the frontal sinus boldly marked.  The squareness of it
showed “ratiocination”; and the fulness under the eyes “language”.  He
had the short, broad nose that marks energy; the square chin—marked
despite a thick, unkempt beard—and massive jaw that showed great
resolution.

“No bad man for the Desert!” I thought as I looked.

Miss Trelawny came very quickly.  When Mr. Corbeck saw her, he seemed
somewhat surprised.  But his annoyance and excitement had not
disappeared; quite enough remained to cover up any such secondary and
purely exoteric feeling as surprise. But as she spoke he never took his
eyes off her; and I made a mental note that I would find some early
opportunity of investigating the cause of his surprise.  She began with
an apology which quite smoothed down his ruffled feelings:

“Of course, had my Father been well you would not have been kept
waiting.  Indeed, had not I been on duty in the sick-room when you
called the first time, I should have seen you at once.  Now will you
kindly tell me what is the matter which so presses?” He looked at me
and hesitated.  She spoke at once:

“You may say before Mr. Ross anything which you can tell me.  He has my
fullest confidence, and is helping me in my trouble.  I do not think
you quite understand how serious my Father’s condition is.  For three
days he has not waked, or given any sign of consciousness; and I am in
terrible trouble about him.  Unhappily I am in great ignorance of my
Father and his life.  I only came to live with him a year ago; and I
know nothing whatever of his affairs.  I do not even know who you are,
or in what way your business is associated with him.”  She said this
with a little deprecating smile, all conventional and altogether
graceful; as though to express in the most genuine way her absurd
ignorance.

He looked steadily at her for perhaps a quarter of a minute; then he
spoke, beginning at once as though his mind were made up and his
confidence established:

“My name is Eugene Corbeck.  I am a Master of Arts and Doctor of Laws
and Master of Surgery of Cambridge; Doctor of Letters of Oxford; Doctor
of Science and Doctor of Languages of London University; Doctor of
Philosophy of Berlin; Doctor of Oriental Languages of Paris.  I have
some other degrees, honorary and otherwise, but I need not trouble you
with them.  Those I have named will show you that I am sufficiently
feathered with diplomas to fly into even a sick-room.  Early in
life—fortunately for my interests and pleasures, but unfortunately for
my pocket—I fell in with Egyptology.  I must have been bitten by some
powerful scarab, for I took it bad.  I went out tomb-hunting; and
managed to get a living of a sort, and to learn some things that you
can’t get out of books.  I was in pretty low water when I met your
Father, who was doing some explorations on his own account; and since
then I haven’t found that I have many unsatisfied wants.  He is a real
patron of the arts; no mad Egyptologist can ever hope for a better
chief!”

He spoke with feeling; and I was glad to see that Miss Trelawny
coloured up with pleasure at the praise of her father.  I could not
help noticing, however, that Mr. Corbeck was, in a measure, speaking as
if against time.  I took it that he wished, while speaking, to study
his ground; to see how far he would be justified in taking into
confidence the two strangers before him.  As he went on, I could see
that his confidence kept increasing.  When I thought of it afterward,
and remembered what he had said, I realised that the measure of the
information which he gave us marked his growing trust.

“I have been several times out on expeditions in Egypt for your Father;
and I have always found it a delight to work for him.  Many of his
treasures—and he has some rare ones, I tell you—he has procured
through me, either by my exploration or by purchase—or—or—otherwise.
Your Father, Miss Trelawny, has a rare knowledge.  He sometimes makes
up his mind that he wants to find a particular thing, of whose
existence—if it still exists—he has become aware; and he will follow
it all over the world till he gets it.  I’ve been on just such a chase
now.”

He stopped suddenly, as suddenly as though his mouth had been shut by
the jerk of a string.  We waited; when he went on he spoke with a
caution that was new to him, as though he wished to forestall our
asking any questions:

“I am not at liberty to mention anything of my mission; where it was
to, what it was for, or anything at all about it.  Such matters are in
confidence between Mr. Trelawny and myself; I am pledged to absolute
secrecy.”

He paused, and an embarrassed look crept over his face.  Suddenly he
said:

“You are sure, Miss Trelawny, your Father is not well enough to see me
today?”

A look of wonderment was on her face in turn.  But it cleared at
once;—she stood up, saying in a tone in which dignity and graciousness
were blended:

“Come and see for yourself!”  She moved toward her father’s room; he
followed, and I brought up the rear.

Mr. Corbeck entered the sick-room as though he knew it.  There is an
unconscious attitude or bearing to persons in new surroundings which
there is no mistaking. Even in his anxiety to see his powerful friend,
he glanced for a moment round the room, as at a familiar place.  Then
all his attention became fixed on the bed.  I watched him narrowly, for
somehow I felt that on this man depended much of our enlightenment
regarding the strange matter in which we were involved.

It was not that I doubted him.  The man was of transparent honesty; it
was this very quality which we had to dread.  He was of that
courageous, fixed trueness to his undertaking, that if he should deem
it his duty to guard a secret he would do it to the last.  The case
before us was, at least, an unusual one; and it would, consequently,
require more liberal recognition of bounds of the duty of secrecy than
would hold under ordinary conditions.  To us, ignorance was
helplessness.  If we could learn anything of the past we might at least
form some idea of the conditions antecedent to the attack; and might,
so, achieve some means of helping the patient to recovery. There were
curios which might be removed.... My thoughts were beginning to whirl
once again; I pulled myself up sharply and watched.  There was a look
of infinite pity on the sun-stained, rugged face as he gazed at his
friend, lying so helpless. The sternness of Mr. Trelawny’s face had not
relaxed in sleep; but somehow it made the helplessness more marked.  It
would not have troubled one to see a weak or an ordinary face under
such conditions; but this purposeful, masterful man, lying before us
wrapped in impenetrable sleep, had all the pathos of a great ruin.  The
sight was not a new one to us; but I could see that Miss Trelawny, like
myself, was moved afresh by it in the presence of the stranger.  Mr.
Corbeck’s face grew stern.  All the pity died away; and in its stead
came a grim, hard look which boded ill for whoever had been the cause
of this mighty downfall.  This look in turn gave place to one of
decision; the volcanic energy of the man was working to some definite
purpose.  He glanced around at us; and as his eyes lighted on Nurse
Kennedy his eyebrows went up a trifle.  She noted the look, and glanced
interrogatively at Miss Trelawny, who flashed back a reply with a
glance.  She went quietly from the room, closing the door behind her.
Mr. Corbeck looked first at me, with a strong man’s natural impulse to
learn from a man rather than a woman; then at Miss Trelawny, with a
remembrance of the duty of courtesy, and said:

“Tell me all about it.  How it began and when!”  Miss Trelawny looked
at me appealingly; and forthwith I told him all that I knew.  He
seemed to make no motion during the whole time; but insensibly the
bronze face became steel.  When, at the end, I told him of Mr. Marvin’s
visit and of the Power of Attorney, his look began to brighten.  And
when, seeing his interest in the matter, I went more into detail as to
its terms, he spoke:

“Good!  Now I know where my duty lies!”

With a sinking heart I heard him.  Such a phrase, coming at such a
time, seemed to close the door to my hopes of enlightenment.

“What do you mean?” I asked, feeling that my question was a feeble one.

His answer emphasized my fears:

“Trelawny knows what he is doing.  He had some definite purpose in all
that he did; and we must not thwart him.  He evidently expected
something to happen, and guarded himself at all points.”

“Not at all points!” I said impulsively.  “There must have been a weak
spot somewhere, or he wouldn’t be lying here like that!”  Somehow his
impassiveness surprised me.  I had expected that he would find a valid
argument in my phrase; but it did not move him, at least not in the way
I thought.  Something like a smile flickered over his swarthy face as
he answered me:

“This is not the end!  Trelawny did not guard himself to no purpose.
Doubtless, he expected this too; or at any rate the possibility of it.”

“Do you know what he expected, or from what source?”  The questioner
was Miss Trelawny.

The answer came at once:  “No!  I know nothing of either. I can
guess...”  He stopped suddenly.

“Guess what?”  The suppressed excitement in the girl’s voice was akin
to anguish. The steely look came over the swarthy face again; but there
was tenderness and courtesy in both voice and manner as he replied:

“Believe me, I would do anything I honestly could to relieve you
anxiety.  But in this I have a higher duty.”

“What duty?”

“Silence!”  As he spoke the word, the strong mouth closed like a steel
trap.

We all remained silent for a few minutes.  In the intensity of our
thinking, the silence became a positive thing; the small sounds of life
within and without the house seemed intrusive.  The first to break it
was Miss Trelawny.  I had seen an idea—a hope—flash in her eyes; but
she steadied herself before speaking:

“What was the urgent subject on which you wanted to see me, knowing
that my Father was—not available?”  The pause showed her mastery of
her thoughts.

The instantaneous change in Mr. Corbeck was almost ludicrous.  His
start of surprise, coming close upon his iron-clad impassiveness, was
like a pantomimic change.  But all idea of comedy was swept away by the
tragic earnestness with which he remembered his original purpose.

“My God!” he said, as he raised his hand from the chair back on which
it rested, and beat it down with a violence which would in itself have
arrested attention.  His brows corrugated as he went on:  “I quite
forgot!  What a loss!  Now of all times!  Just at the moment of
success! He lying there helpless, and my tongue tied!  Not able to
raise hand or foot in my ignorance of his wishes!”

“What is it?  Oh, do tell us!  I am so anxious about my dear Father!
Is it any new trouble?  I hope not! oh, I hope not!  I have had such
anxiety and trouble already!  It alarms me afresh to hear you speak so!
Won’t you tell me something to allay this terrible anxiety and
uncertainty?”

He drew his sturdy form up to his full height as he said:

“Alas!  I cannot, may not, tell you anything.  It is his secret.”  He
pointed to the bed. “And yet—and yet I came here for his advice, his
counsel, his assistance.  And he lies there helpless.... And time is
flying by us!  It may soon be too late!”

“What is it? what is it?” broke in Miss Trelawny in a sort of passion
of anxiety, her face drawn with pain.  “Oh, speak!  Say something!
This anxiety, and horror, and mystery are killing me!”  Mr. Corbeck
calmed himself by a great effort.

“I may not tell you details; but I have had a great loss.  My mission,
in which I have spent three years, was successful.  I discovered all
that I sought—and more; and brought them home with me safely.
Treasures, priceless in themselves, but doubly precious to him by whose
wishes and instructions I sought them.  I arrived in London only last
night, and when I woke this morning my precious charge was stolen.
Stolen in some mysterious way.  Not a soul in London knew that I was
arriving.  No one but myself knew what was in the shabby portmanteau
that I carried.  My room had but one door, and that I locked and
bolted. The room was high in the house, five stories up, so that no
entrance could have been obtained by the window.  Indeed, I had closed
the window myself and shut the hasp, for I wished to be secure in every
way.  This morning the hasp was untouched.... And yet my portmanteau
was empty. The lamps were gone! ... There! it is out.  I went to Egypt
to search for a set of antique lamps which Mr. Trelawny wished to
trace.  With incredible labour, and through many dangers, I followed
them.  I brought them safe home.... And now!”  He turned away much
moved.  Even his iron nature was breaking down under the sense of loss.

Miss Trelawny stepped over and laid her hand on his arm.  I looked at
her in amazement.  All the passion and pain which had so moved her
seemed to have taken the form of resolution.  Her form was erect, her
eyes blazed; energy was manifest in every nerve and fibre of her being.
Even her voice was full of nervous power as she spoke.  It was apparent
that she was a marvellously strong woman, and that her strength could
answer when called upon.

“We must act at once!  My Father’s wishes must be carried out if it is
possible to us. Mr. Ross, you are a lawyer.  We have actually in the
house a man whom you consider one of the best detectives in London.
Surely we can do something.  We can begin at once!”  Mr. Corbeck took
new life from her enthusiasm.

“Good!  You are your Father’s daughter!” was all he said.  But his
admiration for her energy was manifested by the impulsive way in which
he took her hand.  I moved over to the door.  I was going to bring
Sergeant Daw; and from her look of approval, I knew that Margaret—Miss
Trelawny—understood.  I was at the door when Mr. Corbeck called me
back.

“One moment,” he said, “before we bring a stranger on the scene.  It
must be borne in mind that he is not to know what you know now, that
the lamps were the objects of a prolonged and difficult and dangerous
search.  All I can tell him, all that he must know from any source, is
that some of my property has been stolen.  I must describe some of the
lamps, especially one, for it is of gold; and my fear is lest the
thief, ignorant of its historic worth, may, in order to cover up his
crime, have it melted.  I would willingly pay ten, twenty, a hundred, a
thousand times its intrinsic value rather than have it destroyed.  I
shall tell him only what is necessary.  So, please, let me answer any
questions he may ask; unless, of course, I ask you or refer to either
of you for the answer.”  We both nodded acquiescence.  Then a thought
struck me and I said:

“By the way, if it be necessary to keep this matter quiet it will be
better to have it if possible a private job for the Detective.  If once
a thing gets to Scotland Yard it is out of our power to keep it quiet,
and further secrecy may be impossible.  I shall sound Sergeant Daw
before he comes up.  If I say nothing, it will mean that he accepts the
task and will deal with it privately.”  Mr. Corbeck answered at once:

“Secrecy is everything.  The one thing I dread is that the lamps, or
some of them, may be destroyed at once.”  To my intense astonishment
Miss Trelawny spoke out at once, but quietly, in a decided voice:

“They will not be destroyed; nor any of them!”  Mr. Corbeck actually
smiled in amazement.

“How on earth do you know?” he asked.  Her answer was still more
incomprehensible:

“I don’t know how I know it; but know it I do.  I feel it all through
me; as though it were a conviction which has been with me all my life!”




Chapter VIII

The Finding of the Lamps


Sergeant Daw at first made some demur; but finally agreed to advise
privately on a matter which might be suggested to him.  He added that I
was to remember that he only undertook to advise; for if action were
required he might have to refer the matter to headquarters.  With this
understanding I left him in the study, and brought Miss Trelawny and
Mr. Corbeck to him.  Nurse Kennedy resumed her place at the bedside
before we left the room.

I could not but admire the cautious, cool-headed precision with which
the traveller stated his case.  He did not seem to conceal anything,
and yet he gave the least possible description of the objects missing.
He did not enlarge on the mystery of the case; he seemed to look on it
as an ordinary hotel theft.  Knowing, as I did, that his one object was
to recover the articles before their identity could be obliterated, I
could see the rare intellectual skill with which he gave the necessary
matter and held back all else, though without seeming to do so.
“Truly,” thought I, “this man has learned the lesson of the Eastern
bazaars; and with Western intellect has improved upon his masters!”  He
quite conveyed his idea to the Detective, who, after thinking the
matter over for a few moments, said:

“Pot or scale? that is the question.”

“What does that mean?” asked the other, keenly alert.

“An old thieves’ phrase from Birmingham.  I thought that in these days
of slang everyone knew that.  In old times at Brum, which had a lot of
small metal industries, the gold- and silver-smiths used to buy metal
from almost anyone who came along. And as metal in small quantities
could generally be had cheap when they didn’t ask where it came from,
it got to be a custom to ask only one thing—whether the customer
wanted the goods melted, in which case the buyer made the price, and
the melting-pot was always on the fire.  If it was to be preserved in
its present state at the buyer’s option, it went into the scale and
fetched standard price for old metal.

“There is a good deal of such work done still, and in other places than
Brum.  When we’re looking for stolen watches we often come across the
works, and it’s not possible to identify wheels and springs out of a
heap; but it’s not often that we come across cases that are wanted.
Now, in the present instance much will depend on whether the thief is a
good man—that’s what they call a man who knows his work.  A
first-class crook will know whether a thing is of more value than
merely the metal in it; and in such case he would put it with someone
who could place it later on—in America or France, perhaps.  By the
way, do you think anyone but yourself could identify your lamps?”

“No one but myself!”

“Are there others like them?”

“Not that I know of,” answered Mr. Corbeck; “though there may be others
that resemble them in many particulars.”  The Detective paused before
asking again: “Would any other skilled person—at the British Museum,
for instance, or a dealer, or a collector like Mr. Trelawny, know the
value—the artistic value—of the lamps?”

“Certainly!  Anyone with a head on his shoulders would see at a glance
that the things were valuable.”

The Detective’s face brightened.  “Then there is a chance.  If your
door was locked and the window shut, the goods were not stolen by the
chance of a chambermaid or a boots coming along.  Whoever did the job
went after it special; and he ain’t going to part with his swag without
his price.  This must be a case of notice to the pawnbrokers.  There’s
one good thing about it, anyhow, that the hue and cry needn’t be given.
We needn’t tell Scotland Yard unless you like; we can work the thing
privately.  If you wish to keep the thing dark, as you told me at the
first, that is our chance.”  Mr. Corbeck, after a pause, said quietly:

“I suppose you couldn’t hazard a suggestion as to how the robbery was
effected?” The Policeman smiled the smile of knowledge and experience.

“In a very simple way, I have no doubt, sir.  That is how all these
mysterious crimes turn out in the long-run.  The criminal knows his
work and all the tricks of it; and he is always on the watch for
chances. Moreover, he knows by experience what these chances are likely
to be, and how they usually come.  The other person is only careful; he
doesn’t know all the tricks and pits that may be made for him, and by
some little oversight or other he falls into the trap.  When we know
all about this case, you will wonder that you did not see the method of
it all along!”  This seemed to annoy Mr. Corbeck a little; there was
decided heat in his manner as he answered:

“Look here, my good friend, there is not anything simple about this
case—except that the things were taken.  The window was closed; the
fireplace was bricked up.  There is only one door to the room, and that
I locked and bolted.  There is no transom; I have heard all about hotel
robberies through the transom.  I never left my room in the night.  I
looked at the things before going to bed; and I went to look at them
again when I woke up.  If you can rig up any kind of simple robbery out
of these facts you are a clever man.  That’s all I say; clever enough
to go right away and get my things back.”  Miss Trelawny laid her hand
upon his arm in a soothing way, and said quietly:

“Do not distress yourself unnecessarily.  I am sure they will turn up.”
Sergeant Daw turned to her so quickly that I could not help remembering
vividly his suspicions of her, already formed, as he said:

“May I ask, miss, on what you base that opinion?”

I dreaded to hear her answer, given to ears already awake to suspicion;
but it came to me as a new pain or shock all the same:

“I cannot tell you how I know.  But I am sure of it!”  The Detective
looked at her for some seconds in silence, and then threw a quick
glance at me.

Presently he had a little more conversation with Mr. Corbeck as to his
own movements, the details of the hotel and the room, and the means of
identifying the goods.  Then he went away to commence his inquiries,
Mr. Corbeck impressing on him the necessity for secrecy lest the thief
should get wind of his danger and destroy the lamps.  Mr. Corbeck
promised, when going away to attend to various matters of his own
business, to return early in the evening, and to stay in the house.

All that day Miss Trelawny was in better spirits and looked in better
strength than she had yet been, despite the new shock and annoyance of
the theft which must ultimately bring so much disappointment to her
father.

We spent most of the day looking over the curio treasures of Mr.
Trelawny.  From what I had heard from Mr. Corbeck I began to have some
idea of the vastness of his enterprise in the world of Egyptian
research; and with this light everything around me began to have a new
interest.  As I went on, the interest grew; any lingering doubts which
I might have had changed to wonder and admiration.  The house seemed to
be a veritable storehouse of marvels of antique art.  In addition to
the curios, big and little, in Mr. Trelawny’s own room—from the great
sarcophagi down to the scarabs of all kinds in the cabinets—the great
hall, the staircase landings, the study, and even the boudoir were full
of antique pieces which would have made a collector’s mouth water.

Miss Trelawny from the first came with me, and looked with growing
interest at everything.  After having examined some cabinets of
exquisite amulets she said to me in quite a naive way:

“You will hardly believe that I have of late seldom even looked at any
of these things. It is only since Father has been ill that I seem to
have even any curiosity about them. But now, they grow and grow on me
to quite an absorbing degree.  I wonder if it is that the collector’s
blood which I have in my veins is beginning to manifest itself.  If so,
the strange thing is that I have not felt the call of it before.  Of
course I know most of the big things, and have examined them more or
less; but really, in a sort of way I have always taken them for
granted, as though they had always been there.  I have noticed the same
thing now and again with family pictures, and the way they are taken
for granted by the family.  If you will let me examine them with you it
will be delightful!”

It was a joy to me to hear her talk in such a way; and her last
suggestion quite thrilled me.  Together we went round the various rooms
and passages, examining and admiring the magnificent curios.  There was
such a bewildering amount and variety of objects that we could only
glance at most of them; but as we went along we arranged that we should
take them seriatim, day by day, and examine them more closely.  In the
hall was a sort of big frame of floriated steel work which Margaret
said her father used for lifting the heavy stone lids of the
sarcophagi.  It was not heavy and could be moved about easily enough.
By aid of this we raised the covers in turn and looked at the endless
series of hieroglyphic pictures cut in most of them.  In spite of her
profession of ignorance Margaret knew a good deal about them; her year
of life with her father had had unconsciously its daily and hourly
lesson.  She was a remarkably clever and acute-minded girl, and with a
prodigious memory; so that her store of knowledge, gathered
unthinkingly bit by bit, had grown to proportions that many a scholar
might have envied.

And yet it was all so naive and unconscious; so girlish and simple.
She was so fresh in her views and ideas, and had so little thought of
self, that in her companionship I forgot for the time all the troubles
and mysteries which enmeshed the house; and I felt like a boy again....

The most interesting of the sarcophagi were undoubtedly the three in
Mr. Trelawny’s room.  Of these, two were of dark stone, one of porphyry
and the other of a sort of ironstone.  These were wrought with some
hieroglyphs.  But the third was strikingly different.  It was of some
yellow-brown substance of the dominating colour effect of Mexican onyx,
which it resembled in many ways, excepting that the natural pattern of
its convolutions was less marked.  Here and there were patches almost
transparent—certainly translucent.  The whole chest, cover and all,
was wrought with hundreds, perhaps thousands, of minute hieroglyphics,
seemingly in an endless series.  Back, front, sides, edges, bottom, all
had their quota of the dainty pictures, the deep blue of their
colouring showing up fresh and sharply edged in the yellow stone.  It
was very long, nearly nine feet; and perhaps a yard wide.  The sides
undulated, so that there was no hard line.  Even the corners took such
excellent curves that they pleased the eye.  “Truly,” I said, “this
must have been made for a giant!”

“Or for a giantess!” said Margaret.

This sarcophagus stood near to one of the windows.  It was in one
respect different from all the other sarcophagi in the place.  All the
others in the house, of whatever material—granite, porphyry,
ironstone, basalt, slate, or wood—were quite simple in form within.
Some of them were plain of interior surface; others were engraved, in
whole or part, with hieroglyphics.  But each and all of them had no
protuberances or uneven surface anywhere.  They might have been used
for baths; indeed, they resembled in many ways Roman baths of stone or
marble which I had seen.  Inside this, however, was a raised space,
outlined like a human figure.  I asked Margaret if she could explain it
in any way.  For answer she said:

“Father never wished to speak about this.  It attracted my attention
from the first; but when I asked him about it he said:  ‘I shall tell
you all about it some day, little girl—if I live!  But not yet!  The
story is not yet told, as I hope to tell it to you!  Some day, perhaps
soon, I shall know all; and then we shall go over it together.  And a
mighty interesting story you will find it—from first to last!’  Once
afterward I said, rather lightly I am afraid:  ‘Is that story of the
sarcophagus told yet, Father?’  He shook his head, and looked at me
gravely as he said:  ‘Not yet, little girl; but it will be—if I
live—if I live!’  His repeating that phrase about his living rather
frightened me; I never ventured to ask him again.”

Somehow this thrilled me.  I could not exactly say how or why; but it
seemed like a gleam of light at last.  There are, I think, moments when
the mind accepts something as true; though it can account for neither
the course of the thought, nor, if there be more than one thought, the
connection between them.  Hitherto we had been in such outer darkness
regarding Mr. Trelawny, and the strange visitation which had fallen on
him, that anything which afforded a clue, even of the faintest and most
shadowy kind, had at the outset the enlightening satisfaction of a
certainty.  Here were two lights of our puzzle.  The first that Mr.
Trelawny associated with this particular curio a doubt of his own
living.  The second that he had some purpose or expectation with regard
to it, which he would not disclose, even to his daughter, till
complete. Again it was to be borne in mind that this sarcophagus
differed internally from all the others.  What meant that odd raised
place?  I said nothing to Miss Trelawny, for I feared lest I should
either frighten her or buoy her up with future hopes; but I made up my
mind that I would take an early opportunity for further investigation.

Close beside the sarcophagus was a low table of green stone with red
veins in it, like bloodstone.  The feet were fashioned like the paws of
a jackal, and round each leg was twined a full-throated snake wrought
exquisitely in pure gold.  On it rested a strange and very beautiful
coffer or casket of stone of a peculiar shape.  It was something like a
small coffin, except that the longer sides, instead of being cut off
square like the upper or level part were continued to a point.  Thus it
was an irregular septahedron, there being two planes on each of the two
sides, one end and a top and bottom.  The stone, of one piece of which
it was wrought, was such as I had never seen before.  At the base it
was of a full green, the colour of emerald without, of course, its
gleam. It was not by any means dull, however, either in colour or
substance, and was of infinite hardness and fineness of texture.  The
surface was almost that of a jewel.  The colour grew lighter as it
rose, with gradation so fine as to be imperceptible, changing to a fine
yellow almost of the colour of “mandarin” china.  It was quite unlike
anything I had ever seen, and did not resemble any stone or gem that I
knew.  I took it to be some unique mother-stone, or matrix of some gem.
It was wrought all over, except in a few spots, with fine
hieroglyphics, exquisitely done and coloured with the same blue-green
cement or pigment that appeared on the sarcophagus.  In length it was
about two feet and a half; in breadth about half this, and was nearly a
foot high.  The vacant spaces were irregularly distributed about the
top running to the pointed end.  These places seemed less opaque than
the rest of the stone.  I tried to lift up the lid so that I might see
if they were translucent; but it was securely fixed.  It fitted so
exactly that the whole coffer seemed like a single piece of stone
mysteriously hollowed from within.  On the sides and edges were some
odd-looking protuberances wrought just as finely as any other portion
of the coffer which had been sculptured by manifest design in the
cutting of the stone.  They had queer-shaped holes or hollows,
different in each; and, like the rest, were covered with the
hieroglyphic figures, cut finely and filled in with the same blue-green
cement.

On the other side of the great sarcophagus stood another small table of
alabaster, exquisitely chased with symbolic figures of gods and the
signs of the zodiac.  On this table stood a case of about a foot square
composed of slabs of rock crystal set in a skeleton of bands of red
gold, beautifully engraved with hieroglyphics, and coloured with a blue
green, very much the tint of the figures on the sarcophagus and the
coffer.  The whole work was quite modern.

But if the case was modern what it held was not.  Within, on a cushion
of cloth of gold as fine as silk, and with the peculiar softness of old
gold, rested a mummy hand, so perfect that it startled one to see it.
A woman’s hand, fine and long, with slim tapering fingers and nearly as
perfect as when it was given to the embalmer thousands of years before.
In the embalming it had lost nothing of its beautiful shape; even the
wrist seemed to maintain its pliability as the gentle curve lay on the
cushion.  The skin was of a rich creamy or old ivory colour; a dusky
fair skin which suggested heat, but heat in shadow.  The great
peculiarity of it, as a hand, was that it had in all seven fingers,
there being two middle and two index fingers.  The upper end of the
wrist was jagged, as though it had been broken off, and was stained
with a red-brown stain.  On the cushion near the hand was a small
scarab, exquisitely wrought of emerald.

“That is another of Father’s mysteries.  When I asked him about it he
said that it was perhaps the most valuable thing he had, except one.
When I asked him what that one was, he refused to tell me, and forbade
me to ask him anything concerning it. ‘I will tell you,’ he said, ‘all
about it, too, in good time—if I live!’”

“If I live!” the phrase again.  These three things grouped together,
the Sarcophagus, the Coffer, and the Hand, seemed to make a trilogy of
mystery indeed!

At this time Miss Trelawny was sent for on some domestic matter.  I
looked at the other curios in the room; but they did not seem to have
anything like the same charm for me, now that she was away.  Later on
in the day I was sent for to the boudoir where she was consulting with
Mrs. Grant as to the lodgment of Mr. Corbeck.  They were in doubt as to
whether he should have a room close to Mr. Trelawny’s or quite away
from it, and had thought it well to ask my advice on the subject.  I
came to the conclusion that he had better not be too near; for the
first at all events, he could easily be moved closer if necessary.
When Mrs. Grant had gone, I asked Miss Trelawny how it came that the
furniture of this room, the boudoir in which we were, was so different
from the other rooms of the house.

“Father’s forethought!” she answered.  “When I first came, he thought,
and rightly enough, that I might get frightened with so many records of
death and the tomb everywhere.  So he had this room and the little
suite off it—that door opens into the sitting-room—where I slept last
night, furnished with pretty things.  You see, they are all beautiful.
That cabinet belonged to the great Napoleon.”

“There is nothing Egyptian in these rooms at all then?” I asked, rather
to show interest in what she had said than anything else, for the
furnishing of the room was apparent.  “What a lovely cabinet!  May I
look at it?”

“Of course! with the greatest pleasure!” she answered, with a smile.
“Its finishing, within and without, Father says, is absolutely
complete.”  I stepped over and looked at it closely.  It was made of
tulip wood, inlaid in patterns; and was mounted in ormolu.  I pulled
open one of the drawers, a deep one where I could see the work to great
advantage.  As I pulled it, something rattled inside as though rolling;
there was a tinkle as of metal on metal.

“Hullo!” I said.  “There is something in here.  Perhaps I had better
not open it.”

“There is nothing that I know of,” she answered.  “Some of the
housemaids may have used it to put something by for the time and
forgotten it.  Open it by all means!”

I pulled open the drawer; as I did so, both Miss Trelawny and I started
back in amazement.

There before our eyes lay a number of ancient Egyptian lamps, of
various sizes and of strangely varied shapes.

We leaned over them and looked closely.  My own heart was beating like
a trip-hammer; and I could see by the heaving of Margaret’s bosom that
she was strangely excited.

Whilst we looked, afraid to touch and almost afraid to think, there was
a ring at the front door; immediately afterwards Mr. Corbeck, followed
by Sergeant Daw, came into the hall.  The door of the boudoir was open,
and when they saw us Mr. Corbeck came running in, followed more slowly
by the Detective.  There was a sort of chastened joy in his face and
manner as he said impulsively:

“Rejoice with me, my dear Miss Trelawny, my luggage has come and all my
things are intact!”  Then his face fell as he added, “Except the lamps.
The lamps that were worth all the rest a thousand times....”  He
stopped, struck by the strange pallor of her face.  Then his eyes,
following her look and mine, lit on the cluster of lamps in the drawer.
He gave a sort of cry of surprise and joy as he bent over and touched
them:

“My lamps!  My lamps!  Then they are safe—safe—safe! ... But how, in
the name of God—of all the Gods—did they come here?”

We all stood silent.  The Detective made a deep sound of in-taking
breath.  I looked at him, and as he caught my glance he turned his eyes
on Miss Trelawny whose back was toward him.

There was in them the same look of suspicion which had been there when
he had spoken to me of her being the first to find her father on the
occasions of the attacks.




Chapter IX

The Need of Knowledge


Mr. Corbeck seemed to go almost off his head at the recovery of the
lamps.  He took them up one by one and looked them all over tenderly,
as though they were things that he loved.  In his delight and
excitement he breathed so hard that it seemed almost like a cat
purring.  Sergeant Daw said quietly, his voice breaking the silence
like a discord in a melody:

“Are you quite sure those lamps are the ones you had, and that were
stolen?”

His answer was in an indignant tone:  “Sure!  Of course I’m sure.
There isn’t another set of lamps like these in the world!”

“So far as you know!”  The Detective’s words were smooth enough, but
his manner was so exasperating that I was sure he had some motive in
it; so I waited in silence. He went on:

“Of course there may be some in the British Museum; or Mr. Trelawny may
have had these already.  There’s nothing new under the sun, you know,
Mr. Corbeck; not even in Egypt.  These may be the originals, and yours
may have been the copies.  Are there any points by which you can
identify these as yours?”

Mr. Corbeck was really angry by this time.  He forgot his reserve; and
in his indignation poured forth a torrent of almost incoherent, but
enlightening, broken sentences:

“Identify!  Copies of them!  British Museum!  Rot!  Perhaps they keep a
set in Scotland Yard for teaching idiot policemen Egyptology!  Do I
know them?  When I have carried them about my body, in the desert, for
three months; and lay awake night after night to watch them!  When I
have looked them over with a magnifying-glass, hour after hour, till my
eyes ached; till every tiny blotch, and chip, and dinge became as
familiar to me as his chart to a captain; as familiar as they doubtless
have been all the time to every thick-headed area-prowler within the
bounds of mortality.  See here, young man, look at these!”  He ranged
the lamps in a row on the top of the cabinet.  “Did you ever see a set
of lamps of these shapes—of any one of these shapes?  Look at these
dominant figures on them!  Did you ever see so complete a set—even in
Scotland Yard; even in Bow Street?  Look! one on each, the seven forms
of Hathor. Look at that figure of the Ka of a Princess of the Two
Egypts, standing between Ra and Osiris in the Boat of the Dead, with
the Eye of Sleep, supported on legs, bending before her; and Harmochis
rising in the north.  Will you find that in the British Museum—or Bow
Street?  Or perhaps your studies in the Gizeh Museum, or the
Fitzwilliam, or Paris, or Leyden, or Berlin, have shown you that the
episode is common in hieroglyphics; and that this is only a copy.
Perhaps you can tell me what that figure of Ptah-Seker-Ausar holding
the Tet wrapped in the Sceptre of Papyrus means?  Did you ever see it
before; even in the British Museum, or Gizeh, or Scotland Yard?”

He broke off suddenly; and then went on in quite a different way:

“Look here! it seems to me that the thick-headed idiot is myself!  I
beg your pardon, old fellow, for my rudeness.  I quite lost my temper
at the suggestion that I do not know these lamps.  You don’t mind, do
you?” The Detective answered heartily:

“Lord, sir, not I.  I like to see folks angry when I am dealing with
them, whether they are on my side or the other.  It is when people are
angry that you learn the truth from them.  I keep cool; that is my
trade!  Do you know, you have told me more about those lamps in the
past two minutes than when you filled me up with details of how to
identify them.”

Mr. Corbeck grunted; he was not pleased at having given himself away.
All at once he turned to  me and said in his natural way:

“Now tell me how you got them back?”  I was so surprised that I said
without thinking:

“We didn’t get them back!”  The traveller laughed openly.

“What on earth do you mean?” he asked.  “You didn’t get them back!
Why, there they are before your eyes!  We found you looking at them
when we came in.”  By this time I had recovered my surprise and had my
wits about me.

“Why, that’s just it,” I said.  “We had only come across them, by
accident, that very moment!”

Mr. Corbeck drew back and looked hard at Miss Trelawny and myself;
turning his eyes from one to the other as he asked:

“Do you mean to tell me that no one brought them here; that you found
them in that drawer?  That, so to speak, no one at all brought them
back?”

“I suppose someone must have brought them here; they couldn’t have come
of their own accord.  But who it was, or when, or how, neither of us
knows.  We shall have to make inquiry, and see if any of the servants
know anything of it.”

We all stood silent for several seconds.  It seemed a long time.  The
first to speak was the Detective, who said in an unconscious way:

“Well, I’m damned!  I beg your pardon, miss!”  Then his mouth shut like
a steel trap.

We called up the servants, one by one, and asked them if they knew
anything of some articles placed in a drawer in the boudoir; but none
of them could throw any light on the circumstance.  We did not tell
them what the articles were; or let them see them.

Mr. Corbeck packed the lamps in cotton wool, and placed them in a tin
box.  This, I may mention incidentally, was then brought up to the
detectives’ room, where one of the men stood guard over them with a
revolver the whole night.  Next day we got a small safe into the house,
and placed them in it.  There were two different keys.  One of them I
kept myself; the other I placed in my drawer in the Safe Deposit vault.
We were all determined that the lamps should not be lost again.

About an hour after we had found the lamps, Doctor Winchester arrived.
He had a large parcel with him, which, when unwrapped, proved to be the
mummy of a cat. With Miss Trelawny’s permission he placed this in the
boudoir; and Silvio was brought close to it.  To the surprise of us
all, however, except perhaps Doctor Winchester, he did not manifest the
least annoyance; he took no notice of it whatever.  He stood on the
table close beside it, purring loudly.  Then, following out his plan,
the Doctor brought him into Mr. Trelawny’s room, we all following.
Doctor Winchester was excited; Miss Trelawny anxious.  I was more than
interested myself, for I began to have a glimmering of the Doctor’s
idea.  The Detective was calmly and coldly superior; but Mr. Corbeck,
who was an enthusiast, was full of eager curiosity.

The moment Doctor Winchester got into the room, Silvio began to mew and
wriggle; and jumping out of his arms, ran over to the cat mummy and
began to scratch angrily at it.  Miss Trelawny had some difficulty in
taking him away; but so soon as he was out of the room he became quiet.
When she came back there was a clamour of comments:

“I thought so!” from the Doctor.

“What can it mean?” from Miss Trelawny.

“That’s a very strange thing!” from Mr. Corbeck.

“Odd! but it doesn’t prove anything!” from the Detective.

“I suspend my judgment!” from myself, thinking it advisable to say
something.

Then by common consent we dropped the theme—for the present.

In my room that evening I was making some notes of what had happened,
when there came a low tap on the door.  In obedience to my summons
Sergeant Daw came in, carefully closing the door behind him.

“Well, Sergeant,” said I, “sit down.  What is it?”

“I wanted to speak to you, sir, about those lamps.”  I nodded and
waited:  he went on:  “You know that that room where they were found
opens directly into the room where Miss Trelawny slept last night?”

“Yes.”

“During the night a window somewhere in that part of the house was
opened, and shut again.  I heard it, and took a look round; but I could
see no sign of anything.”

“Yes, I know that!” I said; “I heard a window moved myself.”

“Does nothing strike you as strange about it, sir?”

“Strange!” I said; “Strange! why it’s all the most bewildering,
maddening thing I have ever encountered.  It is all so strange that one
seems to wonder, and simply waits for what will happen next.  But what
do you mean by strange?”

The Detective paused, as if choosing his words to begin; and then said
deliberately:

“You see, I am not one who believes in magic and such things.  I am for
facts all the time; and I always find in the long-run that there is a
reason and a cause for everything.  This new gentleman says these
things were stolen out of his room in the hotel.  The lamps, I take it
from some things he has said, really belong to Mr. Trelawny.  His
daughter, the lady of the house, having left the room she usually
occupies, sleeps that night on the ground floor.  A window is heard to
open and shut during the night.  When we, who have been during the day
trying to find a clue to the robbery, come to the house, we find the
stolen goods in a room close to where she slept, and opening out of it!”

He stopped.  I felt that same sense of pain and apprehension, which I
had experienced when he had spoken to me before, creeping, or rather
rushing, over me again.  I had to face the matter out, however.  My
relations with her, and the feeling toward her which I now knew full
well meant a very deep love and devotion, demanded so much.  I said as
calmly as I could, for I knew the keen eyes of the skilful investigator
were on me:

“And the inference?”

He answered with the cool audacity of conviction:

“The inference to me is that there was no robbery at all.  The goods
were taken by someone to this house, where they were received through a
window on the ground floor.  They were placed in the cabinet, ready to
be discovered when the proper time should come!”

Somehow I felt relieved; the assumption was too monstrous.  I did not
want, however, my relief to be apparent, so I answered as gravely as I
could:

“And who do you suppose brought them to the house?”

“I keep my mind open as to that.  Possibly Mr. Corbeck himself; the
matter might be too risky to trust to a third party.”

“Then the natural extension of your inference is that Mr. Corbeck is a
liar and a fraud; and that he is in conspiracy with Miss Trelawny to
deceive someone or other about those lamps.”

“Those are harsh words, Mr. Ross.  They’re so plain-spoken that they
bring a man up standing, and make new doubts for him.  But I have to go
where my reason points.  It may be that there is another party than
Miss Trelawny in it.  Indeed, if it hadn’t been for the other matter
that set me thinking and bred doubts of its own about her, I wouldn’t
dream of mixing her up in this.  But I’m safe on Corbeck.  Whoever else
is in it, he is!  The things couldn’t have been taken without his
connivance—if what he says is true.  If it isn’t—well! he is a liar
anyhow.  I would think it a bad job to have him stay in the house with
so many valuables, only that it will give me and my mate a chance of
watching him.  We’ll keep a pretty good look-out, too, I tell you.
He’s up in my room now, guarding those lamps; but Johnny Wright is
there too.  I go on before he comes off; so there won’t be much chance
of another house-breaking.  Of course, Mr. Ross, all this, too, is
between you and me.”

“Quite so!  You may depend on my silence!” I said; and he went away to
keep a close eye on the Egyptologist.

It seemed as though all my painful experiences were to go in pairs, and
that the sequence of the previous day was to be repeated; for before
long I had another private visit from Doctor Winchester who had now
paid his nightly visit to his patient and was on his way home.  He took
the seat which I proffered and began at once:

“This is a strange affair altogether.  Miss Trelawny has just been
telling me about the stolen lamps, and of the finding of them in the
Napoleon cabinet.  It would seem to be another complication of the
mystery; and yet, do you know, it is a relief to me.  I have exhausted
all human and natural possibilities of the case, and am beginning to
fall back on superhuman and supernatural possibilities.  Here are such
strange things that, if I am not going mad, I think we must have a
solution before long.  I wonder if I might ask some questions and some
help from Mr. Corbeck, without making further complications and
embarrassing us.  He seems to know an amazing amount regarding Egypt
and all relating to it.  Perhaps he wouldn’t mind translating a little
bit of hieroglyphic.  It is child’s play to him.  What do you think?”

When I had thought the matter over a few seconds I spoke.  We wanted
all the help we could get.  For myself, I had perfect confidence in
both men; and any comparing notes, or mutual assistance, might bring
good results.  Such could hardly bring evil.

“By all means I should ask him.  He seems an extraordinarily learned
man in Egyptology; and he seems to me a good fellow as well as an
enthusiast.  By the way, it will be necessary to be a little guarded as
to whom you speak regarding any information which he may give you.”

“Of course!” he answered.  “Indeed I should not dream of saying
anything to anybody, excepting yourself.  We have to remember that when
Mr. Trelawny recovers he may not like to think that we have been
chattering unduly over his affairs.”

“Look here!” I said, “why not stay for a while:  and I shall ask him to
come and have a pipe with us.  We can then talk over things.”

He acquiesced:  so I went to the room where Mr. Corbeck was, and
brought him back with me.  I thought the detectives were pleased at his
going. On the way to my room he said:

“I don’t half like leaving those things there, with only those men to
guard them. They’re a deal sight too precious to be left to the police!”

From which it would appear that suspicion was not confined to Sergeant
Daw.

Mr. Corbeck and Doctor Winchester, after a quick glance at each other,
became at once on most friendly terms.  The traveller professed his
willingness to be of any assistance which he could, provided, he added,
that it was anything about which he was free to speak.  This was not
very promising; but Doctor Winchester began at once:

“I want you, if you will, to translate some hieroglyphic for me.”

“Certainly, with the greatest pleasure, so far as I can.  For I may
tell you that hieroglyphic writing is not quite mastered yet; though we
are getting at it!  We are getting at it!  What is the inscription?”

“There are two,” he answered.  “One of them I shall bring here.”

He went out, and returned in a minute with the mummy cat which he had
that evening introduced to Silvio.  The scholar took it; and, after a
short examination, said:

“There is nothing especial in this.  It is an appeal to Bast, the Lady
of Bubastis, to give her good bread and milk in the Elysian Fields.
There may be more inside; and if you will care to unroll it, I will do
my best.  I do not think, however, that there is anything special.
From the method of wrapping I should say it is from the Delta; and of a
late period, when such mummy work was common and cheap.  What is the
other inscription you wish me to see?”

“The inscription on the mummy cat in Mr. Trelawny’s room.”

Mr. Corbeck’s face fell.  “No!” he said, “I cannot do that!  I am, for
the present at all events, practically bound to secrecy regarding any
of the things in Mr. Trelawny’s room.”

Doctor Winchester’s comment and my own were made at the same moment.  I
said only the one word “Checkmate!” from which I think he may have
gathered that I guessed more of his idea and purpose than perhaps I had
intentionally conveyed to him.  He murmured:

“Practically bound to secrecy?”

Mr. Corbeck at once took up the challenge conveyed:

“Do not misunderstand me!  I am not bound by any definite pledge of
secrecy; but I am bound in honour to respect Mr. Trelawny’s confidence,
given to me, I may tell you, in a very large measure.  Regarding many
of the objects in his room he has a definite purpose in view; and it
would not be either right or becoming for me, his trusted friend and
confidant, to forestall that purpose.  Mr. Trelawny, you may know—or
rather you do not know or you would not have so construed my remark—is
a scholar, a very great scholar.  He has worked for years toward a
certain end.  For this he has spared no labour, no expense, no personal
danger or self-denial.  He is on the line of a result which will place
him amongst the foremost discoverers or investigators of his age.  And
now, just at the time when any hour might bring him success, he is
stricken down!”

He stopped, seemingly overcome with emotion.  After a time he recovered
himself and went on:

“Again, do not misunderstand me as to another point.  I have said that
Mr. Trelawny has made much confidence with me; but I do not mean to
lead you to believe that I know all his plans, or his aims or objects.
I know the period which he has been studying; and the definite
historical individual whose life he has been investigating, and whose
records he has been following up one by one with infinite patience.
But beyond this I know nothing.  That he has some aim or object in the
completion of this knowledge I am convinced.  What it is I may guess;
but I must say nothing. Please to remember, gentlemen, that I have
voluntarily accepted the position of recipient of a partial confidence.
I have respected that; and I must ask any of my friends to do the same.”

He spoke with great dignity; and he grew, moment by moment, in the
respect and esteem of both Doctor Winchester and myself.  We understood
that he had not done speaking; so we waited in silence till he
continued:

“I have spoken this much, although I know well that even such a hint as
either of you might gather from my words might jeopardise the success
of his work.  But I am convinced that you both wish to help him—and
his daughter,” he said this looking me fairly between the eyes, “to the
best of your power, honestly and unselfishly.  He is so stricken down,
and the manner of it is so mysterious that I cannot but think that it
is in some way a result of his own work.  That he calculated on some
set-back is manifest to us all.  God knows! I am willing to do what I
can, and to use any knowledge I have in his behalf.  I arrived in
England full of exultation at the thought that I had fulfilled the
mission with which he had trusted me.  I had got what he said were the
last objects of his search; and I felt assured that he would now be
able to begin the experiment of which he had often hinted to me.  It is
too dreadful that at just such a time such a calamity should have
fallen on him.  Doctor Winchester, you are a physician; and, if your
face does not belie you, you are a clever and a bold one.  Is there no
way which you can devise to wake this man from his unnatural stupor?”

There was a pause; then the answer came slowly and deliberately:

“There is no ordinary remedy that I know of.  There might possibly be
some extraordinary one.  But there would be no use in trying to find
it, except on one condition.”

“And that?”

“Knowledge!  I am completely ignorant of Egyptian matters, language,
writing, history, secrets, medicines, poisons, occult powers—all that
go to make up the mystery of that mysterious land.  This disease, or
condition, or whatever it may be called, from which Mr. Trelawny is
suffering, is in some way connected with Egypt.  I have had a suspicion
of this from the first; and later it grew into a certainty, though
without proof.  What you have said tonight confirms my conjecture, and
makes me believe that a proof is to be had.  I do not think that you
quite know all that has gone on in this house since the night of the
attack—of the finding of Mr. Trelawny’s body. Now I propose that we
confide in you.  If Mr. Ross agrees, I shall ask him to tell you. He is
more skilled than I am in putting facts before other people.  He can
speak by his brief; and in this case he has the best of all briefs, the
experience of his own eyes and ears, and the evidence that he has
himself taken on the spot from participators in, or spectators of, what
has happened.  When you know all, you will, I hope, be in a position to
judge as to whether you can best help Mr. Trelawny, and further his
secret wishes, by your silence or your speech.”

I nodded approval.  Mr. Corbeck jumped up, and in his impulsive way
held out a hand to each.

“Done!” he said.  “I acknowledge the honour of your confidence; and on
my part I pledge myself that if I find my duty to Mr. Trelawny’s wishes
will, in his own interest, allow my lips to open on his affairs, I
shall speak so freely as I may.”

Accordingly I began, and told him, as exactly as I could, everything
that had happened from the moment of my waking at the knocking on the
door in Jermyn Street.  The only reservations I made were as to my own
feeling toward Miss Trelawny and the matters of small import to the
main subject which followed it; and my conversations with Sergeant Daw,
which were in themselves private, and which would have demanded
discretionary silence in any case.  As I spoke, Mr. Corbeck followed
with breathless interest.  Sometimes he would stand up and pace about
the room in uncontrollable excitement; and then recover himself
suddenly, and sit down again.  Sometimes he would be about to speak,
but would, with an effort, restrain himself.  I think the narration
helped me to make up my own mind; for even as I talked, things seemed
to appear in a clearer light.  Things big and little, in relation of
their importance to the case, fell into proper perspective.  The story
up to date became coherent, except as to its cause, which seemed a
greater mystery than ever.  This is the merit of entire, or collected,
narrative.  Isolated facts, doubts, suspicions, conjectures, give way
to a homogeneity which is convincing.

That Mr. Corbeck was convinced was evident.  He did not go through any
process of explanation or limitation, but spoke right out at once to
the point, and fearlessly like a man:

“That settles me!  There is in activity some Force that needs special
care.  If we all go on working in the dark we shall get in one
another’s way, and by hampering each other, undo the good that any or
each of us, working in different directions, might do.  It seems to me
that the first thing we have to accomplish is to get Mr. Trelawny waked
out of that unnatural sleep.  That he can be waked is apparent from the
way the Nurse has recovered; though what additional harm may have been
done to him in the time he has been lying in that room I suppose no one
can tell.  We must chance that, however.  He has lain there, and
whatever the effect might be, it is there now; and we have, and shall
have, to deal with it as a fact.  A day more or less won’t hurt in the
long-run. It is late now; and we shall probably have tomorrow a task
before us that will require our energies afresh.  You, Doctor, will
want to get to your sleep; for I suppose you have other work as well as
this to do tomorrow.  As for you, Mr. Ross, I understand that you are
to have a spell of watching in the sick-room tonight.  I shall get you
a book which will help to pass the time for you.  I shall go and look
for it in the library.  I know where it was when I was here last; and I
don’t suppose Mr. Trelawny has used it since.  He knew long ago all
that was in it which was or might be of interest to him.  But it will
be necessary, or at least helpful, to understand other things which I
shall tell you later.  You will be able to tell Doctor Winchester all
that would aid him.  For I take it that our work will branch out pretty
soon. We shall each have our own end to hold up; and it will take each
of us all our time and understanding to get through his own tasks.  It
will not be necessary for you to read the whole book.  All that will
interest you—with regard to our matter I mean of course, for the whole
book is interesting as a record of travel in a country then quite
unknown—is the preface, and two or three chapters which I shall mark
for you.”

He shook hands warmly with Doctor Winchester who had stood up to go.

Whilst he was away I sat lonely, thinking.  As I thought, the world
around me seemed to be illimitably great.  The only little spot in
which I was interested seemed like a tiny speck in the midst of a
wilderness. Without and around it were darkness and unknown danger,
pressing in from every side.  And the central figure in our little
oasis was one of sweetness and beauty.  A figure one could love; could
work for; could die for...!

Mr. Corbeck came back in a very short time with the book; he had found
it at once in the spot where he had seen it three years before.  Having
placed in it several slips of paper, marking the places where I was to
read, he put it into my hands, saying:

“That is what started Mr. Trelawny; what started me when I read it; and
which will, I have no doubt, be to you an interesting beginning to a
special study—whatever the end may be.  If, indeed, any of us here may
ever see the end.”

At the door he paused and said:

“I want to take back one thing.  That Detective is a good fellow.  What
you have told me of him puts him in a new light.  The best proof of it
is that I can go quietly to sleep tonight, and leave the lamps in his
care!”

When he had gone I took the book with me, put on my respirator, and
went to my spell of duty in the sick-room!




Chapter X

The Valley of the Sorcerer


I placed the book on the little table on which the shaded lamp rested
and moved the screen to one side.  Thus I could have the light on my
book; and by looking up, see the bed, and the Nurse, and the door.  I
cannot say that the conditions were enjoyable, or calculated to allow
of that absorption in the subject which is advisable for effective
study. However, I composed myself to the work as well as I could.  The
book was one which, on the very face of it, required special attention.
It was a folio in Dutch, printed in Amsterdam in 1650.  Some one had
made a literal translation, writing generally the English word under
the Dutch, so that the grammatical differences between the two tongues
made even the reading of the translation a difficult matter.  One had
to dodge backward and forward among the words.  This was in addition to
the difficulty of deciphering a strange handwriting of two hundred
years ago.  I found, however, that after a short time I got into the
habit of following in conventional English the Dutch construction; and,
as I became more familiar with the writing, my task became easier.

At first the circumstances of the room, and the fear lest Miss Trelawny
should return unexpectedly and find me reading the book, disturbed me
somewhat.  For we had arranged amongst us, before Doctor Winchester had
gone home, that she was not to be brought into the range of the coming
investigation.  We considered that there might be some shock to a
woman’s mind in matters of apparent mystery; and further, that she,
being Mr. Trelawny’s daughter, might be placed in a difficult position
with him afterward if she took part in, or even had a personal
knowledge of, the disregarding of his expressed wishes.  But when I
remembered that she did not come on nursing duty till two o’clock, the
fear of interruption passed away.  I had still nearly three hours
before me. Nurse Kennedy sat in her chair by the bedside, patient and
alert.  A clock ticked on the landing; other clocks in the house
ticked; the life of the city without manifested itself in the distant
hum, now and again swelling into a roar as a breeze floating westward
took the concourse of sounds with it.  But still the dominant idea was
of silence.  The light on my book, and the soothing fringe of green
silk round the shade intensified, whenever I looked up, the gloom of
the sick-room.  With every line I read, this seemed to grow deeper and
deeper; so that when my eyes came back to the page the light seemed to
dazzle me.  I stuck to my work, however, and presently began to get
sufficiently into the subject to become interested in it.

The book was by one Nicholas van Huyn of Hoorn.  In the preface he told
how, attracted by the work of John Greaves of Merton College,
Pyramidographia, he himself visited Egypt, where he became so
interested in its wonders that he devoted some years of his life to
visiting strange places, and exploring the ruins of many temples and
tombs.  He had come across many variants of the story of the building
of the Pyramids as told by the Arabian historian, Ibn Abd Alhokin, some
of which he set down.  These I did not stop to read, but went on to the
marked pages.

As soon as I began to read these, however, there grew on me some sense
of a disturbing influence.  Once or twice I looked to see if the Nurse
had moved, for there was a feeling as though some one were near me.
Nurse Kennedy sat in her place, as steady and alert as ever; and I came
back to my book again.

The narrative went on to tell how, after passing for several days
through the mountains to the east of Aswan, the explorer came to a
certain place.  Here I give his own words, simply putting the
translation into modern English:

“Toward evening we came to the entrance of a narrow, deep valley,
running east and west.  I wished to proceed through this; for the sun,
now nearly down on the horizon, showed a wide opening beyond the
narrowing of the cliffs.  But the fellaheen absolutely refused to enter
the valley at such a time, alleging that they might be caught by the
night before they could emerge from the other end.  At first they would
give no reason for their fear.  They had hitherto gone anywhere I
wished, and at any time, without demur.  On being pressed, however,
they said that the place was the Valley of the Sorcerer, where none
might come in the night.  On being asked to tell of the Sorcerer, they
refused, saying that there was no name, and that they knew nothing.  On
the next morning, however, when the sun was up and shining down the
valley, their fears had somewhat passed away.  Then they told me that a
great Sorcerer in ancient days—‘millions of millions of years’ was the
term they used—a King or a Queen, they could not say which, was buried
there.  They could not give the name, persisting to the last that there
was no name; and that anyone who should name it would waste away in
life so that at death nothing of him would remain to be raised again in
the Other World.  In passing through the valley they kept together in a
cluster, hurrying on in front of me.  None dared to remain behind. They
gave, as their reason for so proceeding, that the arms of the Sorcerer
were long, and that it was dangerous to be the last.  The which was of
little comfort to me who of this necessity took that honourable post.
In the narrowest part of the valley, on the south side, was a great
cliff of rock, rising sheer, of smooth and even surface. Hereon were
graven certain cabalistic signs, and many figures of men and animals,
fishes, reptiles and birds; suns and stars; and many quaint symbols.
Some of these latter were disjointed limbs and features, such as arms
and legs, fingers, eyes, noses, ears, and lips.  Mysterious symbols
which will puzzle the Recording Angel to interpret at the Judgment Day.
The cliff faced exactly north.  There was something about it so
strange, and so different from the other carved rocks which I had
visited, that I called a halt and spent the day in examining the rock
front as well as I could with my telescope.  The Egyptians of my
company were terribly afraid, and used every kind of persuasion to
induce me to pass on.  I stayed till late in the afternoon, by which
time I had failed to make out aright the entry of any tomb, for I
suspected that such was the purpose of the sculpture of the rock.  By
this time the men were rebellious; and I had to leave the valley if I
did not wish my whole retinue to desert.  But I secretly made up my
mind to discover the tomb, and explore it.  To this end I went further
into the mountains, where I met with an Arab Sheik who was willing to
take service with me.  The Arabs were not bound by the same
superstitious fears as the Egyptians; Sheik Abu Some and his following
were willing to take a part in the explorations.

“When I returned to the valley with these Bedouins, I made effort to
climb the face of the rock, but failed, it being of one impenetrable
smoothness.  The stone, generally flat and smooth by nature, had been
chiselled to completeness.  That there had been projecting steps was
manifest, for there remained, untouched by the wondrous climate of that
strange land, the marks of saw and chisel and mallet where the steps
had been cut or broken away.

“Being thus baffled of winning the tomb from below, and being
unprovided with ladders to scale, I found a way by much circuitous
journeying to the top of the cliff. Thence I caused myself to be
lowered by ropes, till I had investigated that portion of the rock face
wherein I expected to find the opening.  I found that there was an
entrance, closed however by a great stone slab.  This was cut in the
rock more than a hundred feet up, being two-thirds the height of the
cliff.  The hieroglyphic and cabalistic symbols cut in the rock were so
managed as to disguise it. The cutting was deep, and was continued
through the rock and the portals of the doorway, and through the great
slab which formed the door itself. This was fixed in place with such
incredible exactness that no stone chisel or cutting implement which I
had with me could find a lodgment in the interstices.  I used much
force, however; and by many heavy strokes won a way into the tomb, for
such I found it to be.  The stone door having fallen into the entrance
I passed over it into the tomb, noting as I went a long iron chain
which hung coiled on a bracket close to the doorway.

“The tomb I found to be complete, after the manner of the finest
Egyptian tombs, with chamber and shaft leading down to the corridor,
ending in the Mummy Pit.  It had the table of pictures, which seems
some kind of record—whose meaning is now for ever lost—graven in a
wondrous colour on a wondrous stone.

“All the walls of the chamber and the passage were carved with strange
writings in the uncanny form mentioned.  The huge stone coffin or
sarcophagus in the deep pit was marvellously graven throughout with
signs.  The Arab chief and two others who ventured into the tomb with
me, and who were evidently used to such grim explorations, managed to
take the cover from the sarcophagus without breaking it. At which they
wondered; for such good fortune, they said, did not usually attend such
efforts.  Indeed they seemed not over careful; and did handle the
various furniture of the tomb with such little concern that, only for
its great strength and thickness, even the coffin itself might have
been injured.  Which gave me much concern, for it was very beautifully
wrought of rare stone, such as I had no knowledge of.  Much I grieved
that it were not possible to carry it away.  But time and desert
journeyings forbade such; I could only take with me such small matters
as could be carried on the person.

“Within the sarcophagus was a body, manifestly of a woman, swathed with
many wrappings of linen, as is usual with all mummies.  From certain
embroiderings thereon, I gathered that she was of high rank.  Across
the breast was one hand, unwrapped.  In the mummies which I had seen,
the arms and hands are within the wrappings, and certain adornments of
wood, shaped and painted to resemble arms and hands, lie outside the
enwrapped body.

“But this hand was strange to see, for it was the real hand of her who
lay enwrapped there; the arm projecting from the cerements being of
flesh, seemingly made as like marble in the process of embalming.  Arm
and hand were of dusky white, being of the hue of ivory that hath lain
long in air.  The skin and the nails were complete and whole, as though
the body had been placed for burial over night.  I touched the hand and
moved it, the arm being something flexible as a live arm; though stiff
with long disuse, as are the arms of those faqueers which I have seen
in the Indees.  There was, too, an added wonder that on this ancient
hand were no less than seven fingers, the same all being fine and long,
and of great beauty.  Sooth to say, it made me shudder and my flesh
creep to touch that hand that had lain there undisturbed for so many
thousands of years, and yet was like unto living flesh.  Underneath the
hand, as though guarded by it, lay a huge jewel of ruby; a great stone
of wondrous bigness, for the ruby is in the main a small jewel.  This
one was of wondrous colour, being as of fine blood whereon the light
shineth.  But its wonder lay not in its size or colour, though these
were, as I have said, of priceless rarity; but in that the light of it
shone from seven stars, each of seven points, as clearly as though the
stars were in reality there imprisoned.  When that the hand was lifted,
the sight of that wondrous stone lying there struck me with a shock
almost to momentary paralysis.  I stood gazing on it, as did those with
me, as though it were that faded head of the Gorgon Medusa with the
snakes in her hair, whose sight struck into stone those who beheld.  So
strong was the feeling that I wanted to hurry away from the place.  So,
too, those with me; therefore, taking this rare jewel, together with
certain amulets of strangeness and richness being wrought of
jewel-stones, I made haste to depart.  I would have remained longer,
and made further research in the wrappings of the mummy, but that I
feared so to do.  For it came to me all at once that I was in a desert
place, with strange men who were with me because they were not
over-scrupulous. That we were in a lone cavern of the dead, an hundred
feet above the ground, where none could find me were ill done to me,
nor would any ever seek. But in secret I determined that I would come
again, though with more secure following.  Moreover, was I tempted to
seek further, as in examining the wrappings I saw many things of
strange import in that wondrous tomb; including a casket of eccentric
shape made of some strange stone, which methought might have contained
other jewels, inasmuch as it had secure lodgment in the great
sarcophagus itself. There was in the tomb also another coffer which,
though of rare proportion and adornment, was more simply shaped.  It
was of ironstone of great thickness; but the cover was lightly cemented
down with what seemed gum and Paris plaster, as though to insure that
no air could penetrate.  The Arabs with me so insisted in its opening,
thinking that from its thickness much treasure was stored therein, that
I consented thereto.  But their hope was a false one, as it proved.
Within, closely packed, stood four jars finely wrought and carved with
various adornments.  Of these one was the head of a man, another of a
dog, another of a jackal, and another of a hawk.  I had before known
that such burial urns as these were used to contain the entrails and
other organs of the mummied dead; but on opening these, for the
fastening of wax, though complete, was thin, and yielded easily, we
found that they held but oil.  The Bedouins, spilling most of the oil
in the process, groped with their hands in the jars lest treasure
should have been there concealed.  But their searching was of no avail;
no treasure was there. I was warned of my danger by seeing in the eyes
of the Arabs certain covetous glances.  Whereon, in order to hasten
their departure, I wrought upon those fears of superstition which even
in these callous men were apparent.  The chief of the Bedouins ascended
from the Pit to give the signal to those above to raise us; and I, not
caring to remain with the men whom I mistrusted, followed him
immediately.  The others did not come at once; from which I feared that
they were rifling the tomb afresh on their own account.  I refrained to
speak of it, however, lest worse should befall.  At last they came.
One of them, who ascended first, in landing at the top of the cliff
lost his foothold and fell below.  He was instantly killed.  The other
followed, but in safety. The chief came next, and I came last.  Before
coming away I pulled into its place again, as well as I could, the slab
of stone that covered the entrance to the tomb.  I wished, if possible,
to preserve it for my own examination should I come again.

“When we all stood on the hill above the cliff, the burning sun that
was bright and full of glory was good to see after the darkness and
strange mystery of the tomb. Even was I glad that the poor Arab who
fell down the cliff and lay dead below, lay in the sunlight and not in
that gloomy cavern.  I would fain have gone with my companions to seek
him and give him sepulture of some kind; but the Sheik made light of
it, and sent two of his men to see to it whilst we went on our way.

“That night as we camped, one of the men only returned, saying that a
lion of the desert had killed his companion after that they had buried
the dead man in a deep sand without the valley, and had covered the
spot where he lay with many great rocks, so that jackals or other
preying beasts might not dig him up again as is their wont.

“Later, in the light of the fire round which the men sat or lay, I saw
him exhibit to his fellows something white which they seemed to regard
with special awe and reverence.  So I drew near silently, and saw that
it was none other than the white hand of the mummy which had lain
protecting the Jewel in the great sarcophagus. I heard the Bedouin tell
how he had found it on the body of him who had fallen from the cliff.
There was no mistaking it, for there were the seven fingers which I had
noted before.  This man must have wrenched it off the dead body whilst
his chief and I were otherwise engaged; and from the awe of the others
I doubted not that he had hoped to use it as an Amulet, or charm.
Whereas if powers it had, they were not for him who had taken it from
the dead; since his death followed hard upon his theft.  Already his
Amulet had had an awesome baptism; for the wrist of the dead hand was
stained with red as though it had been dipped in recent blood.

“That night I was in certain fear lest there should be some violence
done to me; for if the poor dead hand was so valued as a charm, what
must be the worth in such wise of the rare Jewel which it had guarded.
Though only the chief knew of it, my doubt was perhaps even greater;
for he could so order matters as to have me at his mercy when he would.
I guarded myself, therefore, with wakefulness so well as I could,
determined that at my earliest opportunity I should leave this party,
and complete my journeying home, first to the Nile bank, and then down
its course to Alexandria; with other guides who knew not what strange
matters I had with me.

“At last there came over me a disposition of sleep, so potent that I
felt it would be resistless.  Fearing attack, or that being searched in
my sleep the Bedouin might find the Star Jewel which he had seen me
place with others in my dress, I took it out unobserved and held it in
my hand.  It seemed to give back the light of the flickering fire and
the light of the stars—for there was no moon—with equal fidelity; and
I could note that on its reverse it was graven deeply with certain
signs such as I had seen in the tomb.  As I sank into the
unconsciousness of sleep, the graven Star Jewel was hidden in the
hollow of my clenched hand.

“I waked out of sleep with the light of the morning sun on my face.  I
sat up and looked around me.  The fire was out, and the camp was
desolate; save for one figure which lay prone close to me.  It was that
of the Arab chief, who lay on his back, dead.  His face was almost
black; and his eyes were open, and staring horribly up at the sky, as
though he saw there some dreadful vision.  He had evidently been
strangled; for on looking, I found on his throat the red marks where
fingers had pressed.  There seemed so many of these marks that I
counted them.  There were seven; and all parallel, except the thumb
mark, as though made with one hand.  This thrilled me as I thought of
the mummy hand with the seven fingers.

“Even there, in the open desert, it seemed as if there could be
enchantments!

“In my surprise, as I bent over him, I opened my right hand, which up
to now I had held shut with the feeling, instinctive even in sleep, of
keeping safe that which it held.  As I did so, the Star Jewel held
there fell out and struck the dead man on the mouth.  Mirabile dictu
there came forth at once from the dead mouth a great gush of blood, in
which the red jewel was for the moment lost.  I turned the dead man
over to look for it, and found that he lay with his right hand bent
under him as though he had fallen on it; and in it he held a great
knife, keen of point and edge, such as Arabs carry at the belt.  It may
have been that he was about to murder me when vengeance came on him,
whether from man or God, or the Gods of Old, I know not.  Suffice it,
that when I found my Ruby Jewel, which shone up as a living star from
the mess of blood wherein it lay, I paused not, but fled from the
place. I journeyed on alone through the hot desert, till, by God’s
grace, I came upon an Arab tribe camping by a well, who gave me salt.
With them I rested till they had set me on my way.

“I know not what became of the mummy hand, or of those who had it.
What strife, or suspicion, or disaster, or greed went with it I know
not; but some such cause there must have been, since those who had it
fled with it.  It doubtless is used as a charm of potence by some
desert tribe.

“At the earliest opportunity I made examination of the Star Ruby, as I
wished to try to understand what was graven on it.  The symbols—whose
meaning, however, I could not understand—were as follows...”

Twice, whilst I had been reading this engrossing narrative, I had
thought that I had seen across the page streaks of shade, which the
weirdness of the subject had made to seem like the shadow of a hand.
On the first of these occasions I found that the illusion came from the
fringe of green silk around the lamp; but on the second I had looked
up, and my eyes had lit on the mummy hand across the room on which the
starlight was falling under the edge of the blind.  It was of little
wonder that I had connected it with such a narrative; for if my eyes
told me truly, here, in this room with me, was the very hand of which
the traveller Van Huyn had written.  I looked over at the bed; and it
comforted me to think that the Nurse still sat there, calm and wakeful.
At such a time, with such surrounds, during such a narrative, it was
well to have assurance of the presence of some living person.

I sat looking at the book on the table before me; and so many strange
thoughts crowded on me that my mind began to whirl.  It was almost as
if the light on the white fingers in front of me was beginning to have
some hypnotic effect.  All at once, all thoughts seemed to stop; and
for an instant the world and time stood still.

There lay a real hand across the book!  What was there to so overcome
me, as was the case?  I knew the hand that I saw on the book—and loved
it.  Margaret Trelawny’s hand was a joy to me to see—to touch; and yet
at that moment, coming after other marvellous things, it had a
strangely moving effect on me.  It was but momentary, however, and had
passed even before her voice had reached me.

“What disturbs you?  What are you staring at the book for?  I thought
for an instant that you must have been overcome again!”  I jumped up.

“I was reading,” I said, “an old book from the library.”  As I spoke I
closed it and put it under my arm.  “I shall now put it back, as I
understand that your Father wishes all things, especially books, kept
in their proper places.”  My words were intentionally misleading; for I
did not wish her to know what I was reading, and thought it best not to
wake her curiosity by leaving the book about.  I went away, but not to
the library; I left the book in my room where I could get it when I had
had my sleep in the day.  When I returned Nurse Kennedy was ready to go
to bed; so Miss Trelawny watched with me in the room.  I did not want
any book whilst she was present.  We sat close together and talked in a
whisper whilst the moments flew by.  It was with surprise that I noted
the edge of the curtains changing from grey to yellow light. What we
talked of had nothing to do with the sick man, except in so far that
all which concerned his daughter must ultimately concern him.  But it
had nothing to say to Egypt, or mummies, or the dead, or caves, or
Bedouin chiefs.  I could well take note in the growing light that
Margaret’s hand had not seven fingers, but five; for it lay in mine.

When Doctor Winchester arrived in the morning and had made his visit to
his patient, he came to see me as I sat in the dining-room having a
little meal—breakfast or supper, I hardly knew which it was—before I
went to lie down.  Mr. Corbeck came in at the same time; and we resumed
out conversation where we had left it the night before.  I told Mr.
Corbeck that I had read the chapter about the finding of the tomb, and
that I thought Doctor Winchester should read it, too.  The latter said
that, if he might, he would take it with him; he had that morning to
make a railway journey to Ipswich, and would read it on the train.  He
said he would bring it back with him when he came again in the evening.
I went up to my room to bring it down; but I could not find it
anywhere. I had a distinct recollection of having left it on the little
table beside my bed, when I had come up after Miss Trelawny’s going on
duty into the sick-room.  It was very strange; for the book was not of
a kind that any of the servants would be likely to take.  I had to come
back and explain to the others that I could not find it.

When Doctor Winchester had gone, Mr. Corbeck, who seemed to know the
Dutchman’s work by heart, talked the whole matter over with me.  I told
him that I was interrupted by a change of nurses, just as I had come to
the description of the ring.  He smiled as he said:

“So far as that is concerned, you need not be disappointed.  Not in Van
Huyn’s time, nor for nearly two centuries later, could the meaning of
that engraving have been understood.  It was only when the work was
taken up and followed by Young and Champollion, by Birch and Lepsius
and Rosellini and Salvolini, by Mariette Bey and by Wallis Budge and
Flinders Petrie and the other scholars of their times that great
results ensued, and that the true meaning of hieroglyphic was known.

“Later, I shall explain to you, if Mr. Trelawny does not explain it
himself, or if he does not forbid me to, what it means in that
particular place.  I think it will be better for you to know what
followed Van Huyn’s narrative; for with the description of the stone,
and the account of his bringing it to Holland at the termination of his
travels, the episode ends.  Ends so far as his book is concerned.  The
chief thing about the book is that it sets others thinking—and acting.
Amongst them were Mr. Trelawny and myself.  Mr. Trelawny is a good
linguist of the Orient, but he does not know Northern tongues.  As for
me I have a faculty for learning languages; and when I was pursuing my
studies in Leyden I learned Dutch so that I might more easily make
references in the library there.  Thus it was, that at the very time
when Mr. Trelawny, who, in making his great collection of works on
Egypt, had, through a booksellers’ catalogue, acquired this volume with
the manuscript translation, was studying it, I was reading another
copy, in original Dutch, in Leyden.  We were both struck by the
description of the lonely tomb in the rock; cut so high up as to be
inaccessible to ordinary seekers:  with all means of reaching it
carefully obliterated; and yet with such an elaborate ornamentation of
the smoothed surface of the cliff as Van Huyn has described.  It also
struck us both as an odd thing—for in the years between Van Huyn’s
time and our own the general knowledge of Egyptian curios and records
has increased marvellously—that in the case of such a tomb, made in
such a place, and which must have cost an immense sum of money, there
was no seeming record or effigy to point out who lay within.  Moreover,
the very name of the place, ‘the Valley of the Sorcerer’, had, in a
prosaic age, attractions of its own. When we met, which we did through
his seeking the assistance of other Egyptologists in his work, we
talked over this as we did over many other things; and we determined to
make search for the mysterious valley. Whilst we were waiting to start
on the travel, for many things were required which Mr. Trelawny
undertook to see to himself, I went to Holland to try if I could by any
traces verify Van Huyn’s narrative.  I went straight to Hoorn, and set
patiently to work to find the house of the traveller and his
descendants, if any.  I need not trouble you with details of my
seeking—and finding. Hoorn is a place that has not changed much since
Van Huyn’s time, except that it has lost the place which it held
amongst commercial cities.  Its externals are such as they had been
then; in such a sleepy old place a century or two does not count for
much.  I found the house, and discovered that none of the descendants
were alive. I searched records; but only to one end—death and
extinction.  Then I set me to work to find what had become of his
treasures; for that such a traveller must have had great treasures was
apparent.  I traced a good many to museums in Leyden, Utrecht, and
Amsterdam; and some few to the private houses of rich collectors.  At
last, in the shop of an old watchmaker and jeweller at Hoorn, I found
what he considered his chiefest treasure; a great ruby, carven like a
scarab, with seven stars, and engraven with hieroglyphics.  The old man
did not know hieroglyphic character, and in his old-world, sleepy life,
the philological discoveries of recent years had not reached him.  He
did not know anything of Van Huyn, except that such a person had been,
and that his name was, during two centuries, venerated in the town as a
great traveller.  He valued the jewel as only a rare stone, spoiled in
part by the cutting; and though he was at first loth to part with such
an unique gem, he became amenable ultimately to commercial reason.  I
had a full purse, since I bought for Mr. Trelawny, who is, as I suppose
you know, immensely wealthy.  I was shortly on my way back to London,
with the Star Ruby safe in my pocket-book; and in my heart a joy and
exultation which knew no bounds.

“For here we were with proof of Van Huyn’s wonderful story.  The jewel
was put in security in Mr. Trelawny’s great safe; and we started out on
our journey of exploration in full hope.

“Mr. Trelawny was, at the last, loth to leave his young wife whom he
dearly loved; but she, who loved him equally, knew his longing to
prosecute the search.  So keeping to herself, as all good women do, all
her anxieties—which in her case were special—she bade him follow out
his bent.”




Chapter XI

A Queen’s Tomb


“Mr. Trelawny’s hope was at least as great as my own.  He is not so
volatile a man as I am, prone to ups and downs of hope and despair; but
he has a fixed purpose which crystallises hope into belief.  At times I
had feared that there might have been two such stones, or that the
adventures of Van Huyn were traveller’s fictions, based on some
ordinary acquisition of the curio in Alexandria or Cairo, or London or
Amsterdam. But Mr. Trelawny never faltered in his belief.  We had many
things to distract our minds from belief or disbelief.  This was soon
after Arabi Pasha, and Egypt was no safe place for travellers,
especially if they were English.  But Mr. Trelawny is a fearless man;
and I almost come to think at times that I am not a coward myself.  We
got together a band of Arabs whom one or other of us had known in
former trips to the desert, and whom we could trust; that is, we did
not distrust them as much as others.  We were numerous enough to
protect ourselves from chance marauding bands, and we took with us
large impedimenta.  We had secured the consent and passive co-operation
of the officials still friendly to Britain; in the acquiring of which
consent I need hardly say that Mr. Trelawny’s riches were of chief
importance.  We found our way in dhahabiyehs to Aswan; whence, having
got some Arabs from the Sheik and having given our usual backsheesh, we
set out on our journey through the desert.

“Well, after much wandering and trying every winding in the
interminable jumble of hills, we came at last at nightfall on just such
a valley as Van Huyn had described. A valley with high, steep cliffs;
narrowing in the centre, and widening out to the eastern and western
ends.  At daylight we were opposite the cliff and could easily note the
opening high up in the rock, and the hieroglyphic figures which were
evidently intended originally to conceal it.

“But the signs which had baffled Van Huyn and those of his time—and
later, were no secrets to us.  The host of scholars who have given
their brains and their lives to this work, had wrested open the
mysterious prison-house of Egyptian language.  On the hewn face of the
rocky cliff we, who had learned the secrets, could read what the Theban
priesthood had had there inscribed nearly fifty centuries before.

“For that the external inscription was the work of the priesthood—and
a hostile priesthood at that—there could be no living doubt.  The
inscription on the rock, written in hieroglyphic, ran thus:

“‘Hither the Gods come not at any summons.  The “Nameless One” has
insulted them and is for ever alone.  Go not nigh, lest their vengeance
wither you away!’

“The warning must have been a terribly potent one at the time it was
written and for thousands of years afterwards; even when the language
in which it was given had become a dead mystery to the people of the
land. The tradition of such a terror lasts longer than its cause.  Even
in the symbols used there was an added significance of alliteration.
‘For ever’ is given in the hieroglyphics as ‘millions of years’.  This
symbol was repeated nine times, in three groups of three; and after
each group a symbol of the Upper World, the Under World, and the Sky.
So that for this Lonely One there could be, through the vengeance of
all the Gods, resurrection in neither the World of Sunlight, in the
World of the Dead, or for the soul in the region of the Gods.

“Neither Mr. Trelawny nor I dared to tell any of our people what the
writing meant. For though they did not believe in the religion whence
the curse came, or in the Gods whose vengeance was threatened, yet they
were so superstitious that they would probably, had they known of it,
have thrown up the whole task and run away.

“Their ignorance, however, and our discretion preserved us.  We made an
encampment close at hand, but behind a jutting rock a little further
along the valley, so that they might not have the inscription always
before them.  For even that traditional name of the place:  ‘The Valley
of the Sorcerer’, had a fear for them; and for us through them.  With
the timber which we had brought, we made a ladder up the face of the
rock.  We hung a pulley on a beam fixed to project from the top of the
cliff.  We found the great slab of rock, which formed the door, placed
clumsily in its place and secured by a few stones.  Its own weight kept
it in safe position.  In order to enter, we had to push it in; and we
passed over it.  We found the great coil of chain which Van Huyn had
described fastened into the rock.  There were, however, abundant
evidences amid the wreckage of the great stone door, which had revolved
on iron hinges at top and bottom, that ample provision had been
originally made for closing and fastening it from within.

“Mr. Trelawny and I went alone into the tomb.  We had brought plenty of
lights with us; and we fixed them as we went along.  We wished to get a
complete survey at first, and then make examination of all in detail.
As we went on, we were filled with ever-increasing wonder and delight.
The tomb was one of the most magnificent and beautiful which either of
us had ever seen.  From the elaborate nature of the sculpture and
painting, and the perfection of the workmanship, it was evident that
the tomb was prepared during the lifetime of her for whose
resting-place it was intended.  The drawing of the hieroglyphic
pictures was fine, and the colouring superb; and in that high cavern,
far away from even the damp of the Nile-flood, all was as fresh as when
the artists had laid down their palettes.  There was one thing which we
could not avoid seeing.  That although the cutting on the outside rock
was the work of the priesthood, the smoothing of the cliff face was
probably a part of the tomb-builder’s original design.  The symbolism
of the painting and cutting within all gave the same idea.  The outer
cavern, partly natural and partly hewn, was regarded architecturally as
only an ante-chamber. At the end of it, so that it would face the east,
was a pillared portico, hewn out of the solid rock.  The pillars were
massive and were seven-sided, a thing which we had not come across in
any other tomb. Sculptured on the architrave was the Boat of the Moon,
containing Hathor, cow-headed and bearing the disk and plumes, and the
dog-headed Hapi, the God of the North.  It was steered by Harpocrates
towards the north, represented by the Pole Star surrounded by Draco and
Ursa Major. In the latter the stars that form what we call the ‘Plough’
were cut larger than any of the other stars; and were filled with gold
so that, in the light of torches, they seemed to flame with a special
significance. Passing within the portico, we found two of the
architectural features of a rock tomb, the Chamber, or Chapel, and the
Pit, all complete as Van Huyn had noticed, though in his day the names
given to these parts by the Egyptians of old were unknown.

“The Stele, or record, which had its place low down on the western
wall, was so remarkable that we examined it minutely, even before going
on our way to find the mummy which was the object of our search.  This
Stele was a great slab of lapis lazuli, cut all over with hieroglyphic
figures of small size and of much beauty.  The cutting was filled in
with some cement of exceeding fineness, and of the colour of pure
vermilion.  The inscription began:

“‘Tera, Queen of the Egypts, daughter of Antef, Monarch of the North
and the South.’ ‘Daughter of the Sun,’ ‘Queen of the Diadems’.

“It then set out, in full record, the history of her life and reign.

“The signs of sovereignty were given with a truly feminine profusion of
adornment. The united Crowns of Upper and Lower Egypt were, in
especial, cut with exquisite precision.  It was new to us both to find
the Hejet and the Desher—the White and the Red crowns of Upper and
Lower Egypt—on the Stele of a queen; for it was a rule, without
exception in the records, that in ancient Egypt either crown was worn
only by a king; though they are to be found on goddesses.  Later on we
found an explanation, of which I shall say more presently.

“Such an inscription was in itself a matter so startling as to arrest
attention from anyone anywhere at any time; but you can have no
conception of the effect which it had upon us.  Though our eyes were
not the first which had seen it, they were the first which could see it
with understanding since first the slab of rock was fixed in the cliff
opening nearly five thousand years before.  To us was given to read
this message from the dead.  This message of one who had warred against
the Gods of Old, and claimed to have controlled them at a time when the
hierarchy professed to be the only means of exciting their fears or
gaining their good will.

“The walls of the upper chamber of the Pit and the sarcophagus Chamber
were profusely inscribed; all the inscriptions, except that on the
Stele, being coloured with bluish-green pigment.  The effect when seen
sideways as the eye caught the green facets, was that of an old,
discoloured Indian turquoise.

“We descended the Pit by the aid of the tackle we had brought with us.
Trelawny went first.  It was a deep pit, more than seventy feet; but it
had never been filled up. The passage at the bottom sloped up to the
sarcophagus Chamber, and was longer than is usually found.  It had not
been walled up.

“Within, we found a great sarcophagus of yellow stone.  But that I need
not describe; you have seen it in Mr. Trelawny’s chamber.  The cover of
it lay on the ground; it had not been cemented, and was just as Van
Huyn had described it.  Needless to say, we were excited as we looked
within. There must, however, be one sense of disappointment.  I could
not help feeling how different must have been the sight which met the
Dutch traveller’s eyes when he looked within and found that white hand
lying lifelike above the shrouding mummy cloths.  It is true that a
part of the arm was there, white and ivory like.

“But there was a thrill to us which came not to Van Huyn!

“The end of the wrist was covered with dried blood!  It was as though
the body had bled after death!  The jagged ends of the broken wrist
were rough with the clotted blood; through this the white bone,
sticking out, looked like the matrix of opal.  The blood had streamed
down and stained the brown wrappings as with rust.  Here, then, was
full confirmation of the narrative.  With such evidence of the
narrator’s truth before us, we could not doubt the other matters which
he had told, such as the blood on the mummy hand, or marks of the seven
fingers on the throat of the strangled Sheik.

“I shall not trouble you with details of all we saw, or how we learned
all we knew. Part of it was from knowledge common to scholars; part we
read on the Stele in the tomb, and in the sculptures and hieroglyphic
paintings on the walls.

“Queen Tera was of the Eleventh, or Theban Dynasty of Egyptian Kings
which held sway between the twenty-ninth and twenty-fifth centuries
before Christ.  She succeeded as the only child of her father, Antef.
She must have been a girl of extraordinary character as well as
ability, for she was but a young girl when her father died.  Her youth
and sex encouraged the ambitious priesthood, which had then achieved
immense power.  By their wealth and numbers and learning they dominated
all Egypt, more especially the Upper portion.  They were then secretly
ready to make an effort for the achievement of their bold and
long-considered design, that of transferring the governing power from a
Kingship to a Hierarchy. But King Antef had suspected some such
movement, and had taken the precaution of securing to his daughter the
allegiance of the army.  He had also had her taught statecraft, and had
even made her learned in the lore of the very priests themselves. He
had used those of one cult against the other; each being hopeful of
some present gain on its own part by the influence of the King, or of
some ultimate gain from its own influence over his daughter.  Thus, the
Princess had been brought up amongst scribes, and was herself no mean
artist.  Many of these things were told on the walls in pictures or in
hieroglyphic writing of great beauty; and we came to the conclusion
that not a few of them had been done by the Princess herself.  It was
not without cause that she was inscribed on the Stele as ‘Protector of
the Arts’.

“But the King had gone to further lengths, and had had his daughter
taught magic, by which she had power over Sleep and Will.  This was
real magic—“black” magic; not the magic of the temples, which, I may
explain, was of the harmless or “white” order, and was intended to
impress rather than to effect.  She had been an apt pupil; and had gone
further than her teachers.  Her power and her resources had given her
great opportunities, of which she had availed herself to the full.  She
had won secrets from nature in strange ways; and had even gone to the
length of going down into the tomb herself, having been swathed and
coffined and left as dead for a whole month. The priests had tried to
make out that the real Princess Tera had died in the experiment, and
that another girl had been substituted; but she had conclusively proved
their error. All this was told in pictures of great merit.  It was
probably in her time that the impulse was given in the restoring the
artistic greatness of the Fourth Dynasty which had found its perfection
in the days of Chufu.

“In the Chamber of the sarcophagus were pictures and writings to show
that she had achieved victory over Sleep.  Indeed, there was everywhere
a symbolism, wonderful even in a land and an age of symbolism.
Prominence was given to the fact that she, though a Queen, claimed all
the privileges of kingship and masculinity.  In one place she was
pictured in man’s dress, and wearing the White and Red Crowns.  In the
following picture she was in female dress, but still wearing the Crowns
of Upper and Lower Egypt, while the discarded male raiment lay at her
feet.  In every picture where hope, or aim, of resurrection was
expressed there was the added symbol of the North; and in many
places—always in representations of important events, past, present,
or future—was a grouping of the stars of the Plough.  She evidently
regarded this constellation as in some way peculiarly associated with
herself.

“Perhaps the most remarkable statement in the records, both on the
Stele and in the mural writings, was that Queen Tera had power to
compel the Gods.  This, by the way, was not an isolated belief in
Egyptian history; but was different in its cause.  She had engraved on
a ruby, carved like a scarab, and having seven stars of seven points,
Master Words to compel all the Gods, both of the Upper and the Under
Worlds.

“In the statement it was plainly set forth that the hatred of the
priests was, she knew, stored up for her, and that they would after her
death try to suppress her name.  This was a terrible revenge, I may
tell you, in Egyptian mythology; for without a name no one can after
death be introduced to the Gods, or have prayers said for him.
Therefore, she had intended her resurrection to be after a long time
and in a more northern land, under the constellation whose seven stars
had ruled her birth.  To this end, her hand was to be in the
air—‘unwrapped’—and in it the Jewel of Seven Stars, so that wherever
there was air she might move even as her Ka could move!  This, after
thinking it over, Mr. Trelawny and I agreed meant that her body could
become astral at command, and so move, particle by particle, and become
whole again when and where required. Then there was a piece of writing
in which allusion was made to a chest or casket in which were contained
all the Gods, and Will, and Sleep, the two latter being personified by
symbols.  The box was mentioned as with seven sides. It was not much of
a surprise to us when, underneath the feet of the mummy, we found the
seven-sided casket, which you have also seen in Mr. Trelawny’s room.
On the underneath part of the wrapping—linen of the left foot was
painted, in the same vermilion colour as that used in the Stele, the
hieroglyphic symbol for much water, and underneath the right foot the
symbol of the earth.  We made out the symbolism to be that her body,
immortal and transferable at will, ruled both the land and water, air
and fire—the latter being exemplified by the light of the Jewel Stone,
and further by the flint and iron which lay outside the mummy wrappings.

“As we lifted the casket from the sarcophagus, we noticed on its sides
the strange protuberances which you have already seen; but we were
unable at the time to account for them.  There were a few amulets in
the sarcophagus, but none of any special worth or significance.  We
took it that if there were such, they were within the wrappings; or
more probably in the strange casket underneath the mummy’s feet.  This,
however, we could not open.  There were signs of there being a cover;
certainly the upper portion and the lower were each in one piece.  The
fine line, a little way from the top, appeared to be where the cover
was fixed; but it was made with such exquisite fineness and finish that
the joining could hardly be seen. Certainly the top could not be moved.
We took it, that it was in some way fastened from within.  I tell you
all this in order that you may understand things with which you may be
in contact later.  You must suspend your judgment entirely.  Such
strange things have happened regarding this mummy and all around it,
that there is a necessity for new belief somewhere.  It is absolutely
impossible to reconcile certain things which have happened with the
ordinary currents of life or knowledge.

“We stayed around the Valley of the Sorcerer, till we had copied
roughly all the drawings and writings on the walls, ceiling and floor.
We took with us the Stele of lapis lazuli, whose graven record was
coloured with vermilion pigment.  We took the sarcophagus and the
mummy; the stone chest with the alabaster jars; the tables of
bloodstone and alabaster and onyx and carnelian; and the ivory pillow
whose arch rested on ‘buckles’, round each of which was twisted an
uraeus wrought in gold. We took all the articles which lay in the
Chapel, and the Mummy Pit; the wooden boats with crews and the ushaptiu
figures, and the symbolic amulets.

“When coming away we took down the ladders, and at a distance buried
them in the sand under a cliff, which we noted so that if necessary we
might find them again. Then with our heavy baggage, we set out on our
laborious journey back to the Nile. It was no easy task, I tell you, to
bring the case with that great sarcophagus over the desert.  We had a
rough cart and sufficient men to draw it; but the progress seemed
terribly slow, for we were anxious to get our treasures into a place of
safety.  The night was an anxious time with us, for we feared attack
from some marauding band. But more still we feared some of those with
us.  They were, after all, but predatory, unscrupulous men; and we had
with us a considerable bulk of precious things. They, or at least the
dangerous ones amongst them, did not know why it was so precious; they
took it for granted that it was material treasure of some kind that we
carried.  We had taken the mummy from the sarcophagus, and packed it
for safety of travel in a separate case.  During the first night two
attempts were made to steal things from the cart; and two men were
found dead in the morning.

“On the second night there came on a violent storm, one of those
terrible simooms of the desert which makes one feel his helplessness.
We were overwhelmed with drifting sand.  Some of our Bedouins had fled
before the storm, hoping to find shelter; the rest of us, wrapped in
our bournous, endured with what patience we could.  In the morning,
when the storm had passed, we recovered from under the piles of sand
what we could of our impedimenta.  We found the case in which the mummy
had been packed all broken, but the mummy itself could nowhere be
found. We searched everywhere around, and dug up the sand which had
piled around us; but in vain.  We did not know what to do, for Trelawny
had his heart set on taking home that mummy.  We waited a whole day in
hopes that the Bedouins, who had fled, would return; we had a blind
hope that they might have in some way removed the mummy from the cart,
and would restore it.  That night, just before dawn, Mr. Trelawny woke
me up and whispered in my ear:

“‘We must go back to the tomb in the Valley of the Sorcerer.  Show no
hesitation in the morning when I give the orders!  If you ask any
questions as to where we are going it will create suspicion, and will
defeat our purpose.’

“‘All right!” I answered.  “But why shall we go there?’  His answer
seemed to thrill through me as though it had struck some chord ready
tuned within:

“‘We shall find the mummy there!  I am sure of it!’  Then anticipating
doubt or argument he added:

“‘Wait, and you shall see!’ and he sank back into his blanket again.

“The Arabs were surprised when we retraced our steps; and some of them
were not satisfied.  There was a good deal of friction, and there were
several desertions; so that it was with a diminished following that we
took our way eastward again.  At first the Sheik did not manifest any
curiosity as to our definite destination; but when it became apparent
that we were again making for the Valley of the Sorcerer, he too showed
concern.  This grew as we drew near; till finally at the entrance of
the valley he halted and refused to go further.  He said he would await
our return if we chose to go on alone.  That he would wait three days;
but if by that time we had not returned he would leave.  No offer of
money would tempt him to depart from this resolution.  The only
concession he would make was that he would find the ladders and bring
them near the cliff.  This he did; and then, with the rest of the
troop, he went back to wait at the entrance of the valley.

“Mr. Trelawny and I took ropes and torches, and again ascended to the
tomb.  It was evident that someone had been there in our absence, for
the stone slab which protected the entrance to the tomb was lying flat
inside, and a rope was dangling from the cliff summit.  Within, there
was another rope hanging into the shaft of the Mummy Pit.  We looked at
each other; but neither said a word.  We fixed our own rope, and as
arranged Trelawny descended first, I following at once.  It was not
till we stood together at the foot of the shaft that the thought
flashed across me that we might be in some sort of a trap; that someone
might descend the rope from the cliff, and by cutting the rope by which
we had lowered ourselves into the Pit, bury us there alive.  The
thought was horrifying; but it was too late to do anything.  I remained
silent.  We both had torches, so that there was ample light as we
passed through the passage and entered the Chamber where the
sarcophagus had stood. The first thing noticeable was the emptiness of
the place.  Despite all its magnificent adornment, the tomb was made a
desolation by the absence of the great sarcophagus, to hold which it
was hewn in the rock; of the chest with the alabaster jars; of the
tables which had held the implements and food for the use of the dead,
and the ushaptiu figures.

“It was made more infinitely desolate still by the shrouded figure of
the mummy of Queen Tera which lay on the floor where the great
sarcophagus had stood!  Beside it lay, in the strange contorted
attitudes of violent death, three of the Arabs who had deserted from
our party.  Their faces were black, and their hands and necks were
smeared with blood which had burst from mouth and nose and eyes.

“On the throat of each were the marks, now blackening, of a hand of
seven fingers.

“Trelawny and I drew close, and clutched each other in awe and fear as
we looked.

“For, most wonderful of all, across the breast of the mummied Queen lay
a hand of seven fingers, ivory white, the wrist only showing a scar
like a jagged red line, from which seemed to depend drops of blood.”




Chapter XII

The Magic Coffer


“When we recovered our amazement, which seemed to last unduly long, we
did not lose any time carrying the mummy through the passage, and
hoisting it up the Pit shaft.  I went first, to receive it at the top.
As I looked down, I saw Mr. Trelawny lift the severed hand and put it
in his breast, manifestly to save it from being injured or lost.  We
left the dead Arabs where they lay.  With our ropes we lowered our
precious burden to the ground; and then took it to the entrance of the
valley where our escort was to wait.  To our astonishment we found them
on the move.  When we remonstrated with the Sheik, he answered that he
had fulfilled his contract to the letter; he had waited the three days
as arranged.  I thought that he was lying to cover up his base
intention of deserting us; and I found when we compared notes that
Trelawny had the same suspicion.  It was not till we arrived at Cairo
that we found he was correct.  It was the 3rd of November 1884 when we
entered the Mummy Pit for the second time; we had reason to remember
the date.

“We had lost three whole days of our reckoning—out of our
lives—whilst we had stood wondering in that chamber of the dead.  Was
it strange, then, that we had a superstitious feeling with regard to
the dead Queen Tera and all belonging to her?  Is it any wonder that it
rests with us now, with a bewildering sense of some power outside
ourselves or our comprehension?  Will it be any wonder if it go down to
the grave with us at the appointed time?  If, indeed, there be any
graves for us who have robbed the dead!”  He was silent for quite a
minute before he went on:

“We got to Cairo all right, and from there to Alexandria, where we were
to take ship by the Messagerie service to Marseilles, and go thence by
express to London.  But

     ‘The best-laid schemes o’ mice and men Gang aft agley.’

At Alexandria, Trelawny found waiting a cable stating that Mrs.
Trelawny had died in giving birth to a daughter.

“Her stricken husband hurried off at once by the Orient Express; and I
had to bring the treasure alone to the desolate house.  I got to London
all safe; there seemed to be some special good fortune to our journey.
When I got to this house, the funeral had long been over.  The child
had been put out to nurse, and Mr. Trelawny had so far recovered from
the shock of his loss that he had set himself to take up again the
broken threads of his life and his work.  That he had had a shock, and
a bad one, was apparent.  The sudden grey in his black hair was proof
enough in itself; but in addition, the strong cast of his features had
become set and stern.  Since he received that cable in the shipping
office at Alexandria I have never seen a happy smile on his face.

“Work is the best thing in such a case; and to his work he devoted
himself heart and soul.  The strange tragedy of his loss and gain—for
the child was born after the mother’s death—took place during the time
that we stood in that trance in the Mummy Pit of Queen Tera.  It seemed
to have become in some way associated with his Egyptian studies, and
more especially with the mysteries connected with the Queen.  He told
me very little about his daughter; but that two forces struggled in his
mind regarding her was apparent.  I could see that he loved, almost
idolised her. Yet he could never forget that her birth had cost her
mother’s life.  Also, there was something whose existence seemed to
wring his father’s heart, though he would never tell me what it was.
Again, he once said in a moment of relaxation of his purpose of silence:

“‘She is unlike her mother; but in both feature and colour she has a
marvellous resemblance to the pictures of Queen Tera.’

“He said that he had sent her away to people who would care for her as
he could not; and that till she became a woman she should have all the
simple pleasures that a young girl might have, and that were best for
her.  I would often have talked with him about her; but he would never
say much.  Once he said to me:  ‘There are reasons why I should not
speak more than is necessary.  Some day you will know—and understand!’
I respected his reticence; and beyond asking after her on my return
after a journey, I have never spoken of her again.  I had never seen
her till I did so in your presence.

“Well, when the treasures which we had—ah!—taken from the tomb had
been brought here, Mr. Trelawny arranged their disposition himself.
The mummy, all except the severed hand, he placed in the great
ironstone sarcophagus in the hall.  This was wrought for the Theban
High Priest Uni, and is, as you may have remarked, all inscribed with
wonderful invocations to the old Gods of Egypt.  The rest of the things
from the tomb he disposed about his own room, as you have seen.
Amongst them he placed, for special reasons of his own, the mummy hand.
I think he regards this as the most sacred of his possessions, with
perhaps one exception.  That is the carven ruby which he calls the
‘Jewel of Seven Stars’, which he keeps in that great safe which is
locked and guarded by various devices, as you know.

“I dare say you find this tedious; but I have had to explain it, so
that you should understand all up to the present.  It was a long time
after my return with the mummy of Queen Tera when Mr. Trelawny
re-opened the subject with me.  He had been several times to Egypt,
sometimes with me and sometimes alone; and I had been several trips, on
my own account or for him.  But in all that time, nearly sixteen years,
he never mentioned the subject, unless when some pressing occasion
suggested, if it did not necessitate, a reference.

“One morning early he sent for me in a hurry; I was then studying in
the British Museum, and had rooms in Hart Street.  When I came, he was
all on fire with excitement.  I had not seen him in such a glow since
before the news of his wife’s death.  He took me at once into his room.
The window blinds were down and the shutters closed; not a ray of
daylight came in.  The ordinary lights in the room were not lit, but
there were a lot of powerful electric lamps, fifty candle-power at
least, arranged on one side of the room.  The little bloodstone table
on which the heptagonal coffer stands was drawn to the centre of the
room.  The coffer looked exquisite in the glare of light which shone on
it.  It actually seemed to glow as if lit in some way from within.

“‘What do you think of it?’ he asked.

“‘It is like a jewel,’ I answered.  ‘You may well call it the
‘sorcerer’s Magic Coffer’, if it often looks like that.  It almost
seems to be alive.’

“‘Do you know why it seems so?’

“‘From the glare of the light, I suppose?’

“‘Light of course,’ he answered, ‘but it is rather the disposition of
light.’  As he spoke he turned up the ordinary lights of the room and
switched off the special ones.  The effect on the stone box was
surprising; in a second it lost all its glowing effect.  It was still a
very beautiful stone, as always; but it was stone and no more.

“‘Do you notice anything about the arrangement of the lamps?’ he asked.

“‘No!’

“‘They were in the shape of the stars in the Plough, as the stars are
in the ruby!’  The statement came to me with a certain sense of
conviction. I do not know why, except that there had been so many
mysterious associations with the mummy and all belonging to it that any
new one seemed enlightening.  I listened as Trelawny went on to explain:

“‘For sixteen years I have never ceased to think of that adventure, or
to try to find a clue to the mysteries which came before us; but never
until last night did I seem to find a solution.  I think I must have
dreamed of it, for I woke all on fire about it.  I jumped out of bed
with a determination of doing something, before I quite knew what it
was that I wished to do.  Then, all at once, the purpose was clear
before me. There were allusions in the writing on the walls of the tomb
to the seven stars of the Great Bear that go to make up the Plough; and
the North was again and again emphasized.  The same symbols were
repeated with regard to the “Magic Box”, as we called it.  We had
already noticed those peculiar translucent spaces in the stone of the
box.  You remember the hieroglyphic writing had told that the jewel
came from the heart of an aerolite, and that the coffer was cut from it
also.  It might be, I thought, that the light of the seven stars,
shining in the right direction, might have some effect on the box, or
something within it.  I raised the blind and looked out. The Plough was
high in the heavens, and both its stars and the Pole Star were straight
opposite the window.  I pulled the table with the coffer out into the
light, and shifted it until the translucent patches were in the
direction of the stars. Instantly the box began to glow, as you saw it
under the lamps, though but slightly. I waited and waited; but the sky
clouded over, and the light died away.  So I got wires and lamps—you
know how often I use them in experiments—and tried the effect of
electric light.  It took me some time to get the lamps properly placed,
so that they would correspond to the parts of the stone, but the moment
I got them right the whole thing began to glow as you have seen it.

“‘I could get no further, however.  There was evidently something
wanting.  All at once it came to me that if light could have some
effect there should be in the tomb some means of producing light, for
there could not be starlight in the Mummy Pit in the cavern.  Then the
whole thing seemed to become clear.  On the bloodstone table, which has
a hollow carved in its top, into which the bottom of the coffer fits, I
laid the Magic Coffer; and I at once saw that the odd protuberances so
carefully wrought in the substance of the stone corresponded in a way
to the stars in the constellation.  These, then, were to hold lights.

“‘Eureka!’ I cried.  ‘All we want now is the lamps.’”  I tried placing
the electric lights on, or close to, the protuberances.  But the glow
never came to the stone. So the conviction grew on me that there were
special lamps made for the purpose. If we could find them, a step on
the road to solving the mystery should be gained.

“‘But what about the lamps?’ I asked.  ‘Where are they?  When are we to
discover them?  How are we to know them if we do find them?  What—’

“He stopped me at once:

“‘One thing at a time!’ he said quietly.  ‘Your first question contains
all the rest. Where are these lamps?  I shall tell you:  In the tomb!’

“‘In the tomb!’ I repeated in surprise.  ‘Why you and I searched the
place ourselves from end to end; and there was not a sign of a lamp.
Not a sign of anything remaining when we came away the first time; or
on the second, except the bodies of the Arabs.’

“Whilst I was speaking, he had uncoiled some large sheets of paper
which he had brought in his hand from his own room.  These he spread
out on the great table, keeping their edges down with books and
weights.  I knew them at a glance; they were the careful copies which
he had made of our first transcripts from the writing in the tomb.
When he had all ready, he turned to me and said slowly:

“‘Do you remember wondering, when we examined the tomb, at the lack of
one thing which is usually found in such a tomb?’

“‘Yes!  There was no serdab.’

“The serdab, I may perhaps explain,” said Mr. Corbeck to me, “is a sort
of niche built or hewn in the wall of a tomb.  Those which have as yet
been examined bear no inscriptions, and contain only effigies of the
dead for whom the tomb was made.” Then he went on with his narrative:

“Trelawny, when he saw that I had caught his meaning, went on speaking
with something of his old enthusiasm:

“‘I have come to the conclusion that there must be a serdab—a secret
one.  We were dull not to have thought of it before.  We might have
known that the maker of such a tomb—a woman, who had shown in other
ways such a sense of beauty and completeness, and who had finished
every detail with a feminine richness of elaboration—would not have
neglected such an architectural feature.  Even if it had not its own
special significance in ritual, she would have had it as an adornment.
Others had had it, and she liked her own work to be complete.  Depend
upon it, there was—there is—a serdab; and that in it, when it is
discovered, we shall find the lamps.  Of course, had we known then what
we now know or at all events surmise, that there were lamps, we might
have suspected some hidden spot, some cachet.  I am going to ask you to
go out to Egypt again; to seek the tomb; to find the serdab; and to
bring back the lamps!’”

“‘And if I find there is no serdab; or if discovering it I find no
lamps in it, what then?’ He smiled grimly with that saturnine smile of
his, so rarely seen for years past, as he spoke slowly:

“‘Then you will have to hustle till you find them!’

“‘Good!’ I said.  He pointed to one of the sheets.

“‘Here are the transcripts from the Chapel at the south and the east.
I have been looking over the writings again; and I find that in seven
places round this corner are the symbols of the constellation which we
call the Plough, which Queen Tera held to rule her birth and her
destiny.  I have examined them carefully, and I notice that they are
all representations of the grouping of the stars, as the constellation
appears in different parts of the heavens.  They are all astronomically
correct; and as in the real sky the Pointers indicate the Pole Star, so
these all point to one spot in the wall where usually the serdab is to
be found!’

“‘Bravo!’ I shouted, for such a piece of reasoning demanded applause.
He seemed pleased as he went on:

“‘When you are in the tomb, examine this spot.  There is probably some
spring or mechanical contrivance for opening the receptacle.  What it
may be, there is no use guessing.  You will know what best to do, when
you are on the spot.’

“I started the next week for Egypt; and never rested till I stood again
in the tomb.  I had found some of our old following; and was fairly
well provided with help.  The country was now in a condition very
different to that in which it had been sixteen years before; there was
no need for troops or armed men.

“I climbed the rock face alone.  There was no difficulty, for in that
fine climate the woodwork of the ladder was still dependable.  It was
easy to see that in the years that had elapsed there had been other
visitors to the tomb; and my heart sank within me when I thought that
some of them might by chance have come across the secret place.  It
would be a bitter discovery indeed to find that they had forestalled
me; and that my journey had been in vain.

“The bitterness was realised when I lit my torches, and passed between
the seven-sided columns to the Chapel of the tomb.

“There, in the very spot where I had expected to find it, was the
opening of a serdab. And the serdab was empty.

“But the Chapel was not empty; for the dried-up body of a man in Arab
dress lay close under the opening, as though he had been stricken down.
I examined all round the walls to see if Trelawny’s surmise was
correct; and I found that in all the positions of the stars as given,
the Pointers of the Plough indicated a spot to the left hand, or south
side, of the opening of the serdab, where was a single star in gold.

“I pressed this, and it gave way.  The stone which had marked the front
of the serdab, and which lay back against the wall within, moved
slightly.  On further examining the other side of the opening, I found
a similar spot, indicated by other representations of the
constellation; but this was itself a figure of the seven stars, and
each was wrought in burnished gold.  I pressed each star in turn; but
without result.  Then it struck me that if the opening spring was on
the left, this on the right might have been intended for the
simultaneous pressure of all the stars by one hand of seven fingers.
By using both my hands, I managed to effect this.

“With a loud click, a metal figure seemed to dart from close to the
opening of the serdab; the stone slowly swung back to its place, and
shut with a click.  The glimpse which I had of the descending figure
appalled me for the moment.  It was like that grim guardian which,
according to the Arabian historian Ibn Abd Alhokin, the builder of the
Pyramids, King Saurid Ibn Salhouk placed in the Western Pyramid to
defend its treasure:  ‘A marble figure, upright, with lance in hand;
with on his head a serpent wreathed.  When any approached, the serpent
would bite him on one side, and twining about his throat and killing
him, would return again to his place.’

“I knew well that such a figure was not wrought to pleasantry; and that
to brave it was no child’s play.  The dead Arab at my feet was proof of
what could be done!  So I examined again along the wall; and found here
and there chippings as if someone had been tapping with a heavy hammer.
This then had been what happened:  The grave-robber, more expert at his
work than we had been, and suspecting the presence of a hidden serdab,
had made essay to find it.  He had struck the spring by chance; had
released the avenging ‘Treasurer’, as the Arabian writer designated
him. The issue spoke for itself.  I got a piece of wood, and, standing
at a safe distance, pressed with the end of it upon the star.

“Instantly the stone flew back.  The hidden figure within darted
forward and thrust out its lance.  Then it rose up and disappeared.  I
thought I might now safely press on the seven stars; and did so.  Again
the stone rolled back; and the ‘Treasurer’ flashed by to his hidden
lair.

“I repeated both experiments several times; with always the same
result. I should have liked to examine the mechanism of that figure of
such malignant mobility; but it was not possible without such tools as
could not easily be had.  It might be necessary to cut into a whole
section of the rock.  Some day I hope to go back, properly equipped,
and attempt it.

“Perhaps you do not know that the entrance to a serdab is almost always
very narrow; sometimes a hand can hardly be inserted.  Two things I
learned from this serdab.  The first was that the lamps, if lamps at
all there had been, could not have been of large size; and secondly,
that they would be in some way associated with Hathor, whose symbol,
the hawk in a square with the right top corner forming a smaller
square, was cut in relief on the wall within, and coloured the bright
vermilion which we had found on the Stele.  Hathor is the goddess who
in Egyptian mythology answers to Venus of the Greeks, in as far as she
is the presiding deity of beauty and pleasure.  In the Egyptian
mythology, however, each God has many forms; and in some aspects Hathor
has to do with the idea of resurrection.  There are seven forms or
variants of the Goddess; why should not these correspond in some way to
the seven lamps!  That there had been such lamps, I was convinced.  The
first grave-robber had met his death; the second had found the contents
of the serdab.  The first attempt had been made years since; the state
of the body proved this.  I had no clue to the second attempt.  It
might have been long ago; or it might have been recently.  If, however,
others had been to the tomb, it was probable that the lamps had been
taken long ago.  Well! all the more difficult would be my search; for
undertaken it must be!

“That was nearly three years ago; and for all that time I have been
like the man in the Arabian Nights, seeking old lamps, not for new, but
for cash.  I dared not say what I was looking for, or attempt to give
any description; for such would have defeated my purpose.  But I had in
my own mind at the start a vague idea of what I must find.  In process
of time this grew more and more clear; till at last I almost overshot
my mark by searching for something which might have been wrong.

“The disappointments I suffered, and the wild-goose chases I made,
would fill a volume; but I persevered.  At last, not two months ago, I
was shown by an old dealer in Mossul one lamp such as I had looked for.
I had been tracing it for nearly a year, always suffering
disappointment, but always buoyed up to further endeavour by a growing
hope that I was on the track.

“I do not know how I restrained myself when I realised that, at last, I
was at least close to success.  I was skilled, however, in the finesse
of Eastern trade; and the Jew-Arab-Portugee trader met his match.  I
wanted to see all his stock before buying; and one by one he produced,
amongst masses of rubbish, seven different lamps.  Each of them had a
distinguishing mark; and each and all was some form of the symbol of
Hathor.  I think I shook the imperturbability of my swarthy friend by
the magnitude of my purchases; for in order to prevent him guessing
what form of goods I sought, I nearly cleared out his shop.  At the end
he nearly wept, and said I had ruined him; for now he had nothing to
sell. He would have torn his hair had he known what price I should
ultimately have given for some of his stock, that perhaps he valued
least.

“I parted with most of my merchandise at normal price as I hurried
home. I did not dare to give it away, or even lose it, lest I should
incur suspicion.  My burden was far too precious to be risked by any
foolishness now.  I got on as fast as it is possible to travel in such
countries; and arrived in London with only the lamps and certain
portable curios and papyri which I had picked up on my travels.

“Now, Mr. Ross, you know all I know; and I leave it to your discretion
how much, if any of it, you will tell Miss Trelawny.”

As he finished a clear young voice said behind us:

“What about Miss Trelawny?  She is here!”

We turned, startled; and looked at each other inquiringly.  Miss
Trelawny stood in the doorway.  We did not know how long she had been
present, or how much she had heard.




Chapter XIII

Awaking From the Trance


The first unexpected words may always startle a hearer; but when the
shock is over, the listener’s reason has asserted itself, and he can
judge of the manner, as well as of the matter, of speech.  Thus it was
on this occasion.  With intelligence now alert, I could not doubt of
the simple sincerity of Margaret’s next question.

“What have you two men been talking about all this time, Mr. Ross?  I
suppose, Mr. Corbeck has been telling you all his adventures in finding
the lamps.  I hope you will tell me too, some day, Mr. Corbeck; but
that must not be till my poor Father is better.  He would like, I am
sure, to tell me all about these things himself; or to be present when
I heard them.”  She glanced sharply from one to the other.  “Oh, that
was what you were saying as I came in?  All right!  I shall wait; but I
hope it won’t be long.  The continuance of Father’s condition is, I
feel, breaking me down.  A little while ago I felt that my nerves were
giving out; so I determined to go out for a walk in the Park.  I am
sure it will do me good.  I want you, if you will, Mr. Ross, to be with
Father whilst I am away.  I shall feel secure then.”

I rose with alacrity, rejoicing that the poor girl was going out, even
for half an hour. She was looking terribly wearied and haggard; and the
sight of her pale cheeks made my heart ache.  I went to the sick-room;
and sat down in my usual place.  Mrs. Grant was then on duty; we had
not found it necessary to have more than one person in the room during
the day.  When I came in, she took occasion to go about some household
duty. The blinds were up, but the north aspect of the room softened the
hot glare of the sunlight without.

I sat for a long time thinking over all that Mr. Corbeck had told me;
and weaving its wonders into the tissue of strange things which had
come to pass since I had entered the house.  At times I was inclined to
doubt; to doubt everything and every one; to doubt even the evidences
of my own five senses.  The warnings of the skilled detective kept
coming back to my mind.  He had put down Mr. Corbeck as a clever liar,
and a confederate of Miss Trelawny.  Of Margaret!  That settled it!
Face to face with such a proposition as that, doubt vanished.  Each
time when her image, her name, the merest thought of her, came before
my mind, each event stood out stark as a living fact.  My life upon her
faith!

I was recalled from my reverie, which was fast becoming a dream of
love, in a startling manner.  A voice came from the bed; a deep,
strong, masterful voice.  The first note of it called up like a clarion
my eyes and my ears.  The sick man was awake and speaking!

“Who are you?  What are you doing here?”

Whatever ideas any of us had ever formed of his waking, I am quite sure
that none of us expected to see him start up all awake and full master
of himself.  I was so surprised that I answered almost mechanically:

“Ross is my name.  I have been watching by you!”  He looked surprised
for an instant, and then I could see that his habit of judging for
himself came into play.

“Watching by me!  How do you mean?  Why watching by me?”  His eye had
now lit on his heavily bandaged wrist.  He went on in a different tone;
less aggressive, more genial, as of one accepting facts:

“Are you a doctor?”  I felt myself almost smiling as I answered; the
relief from the long pressure of anxiety regarding his life was
beginning to tell:

“No, sir!”

“Then why are you here?  If you are not a doctor, what are you?”  His
tone was again more dictatorial.  Thought is quick; the whole train of
reasoning on which my answer must be based flooded through my brain
before the words could leave my lips. Margaret!  I must think of
Margaret!  This was her father, who as yet knew nothing of me; even of
my very existence.  He would be naturally curious, if not anxious, to
know why I amongst men had been chosen as his daughter’s friend on the
occasion of his illness.  Fathers are naturally a little jealous in
such matters as a daughter’s choice, and in the undeclared state of my
love for Margaret I must do nothing which could ultimately embarrass
her.

“I am a Barrister.  It is not, however, in that capacity I am here; but
simply as a friend of your daughter.  It was probably her knowledge of
my being a lawyer which first determined her to ask me to come when she
thought you had been murdered. Afterwards she was good enough to
consider me to be a friend, and to allow me to remain in accordance
with your expressed wish that someone should remain to watch.”

Mr. Trelawny was manifestly a man of quick thought, and of few words.
He gazed at me keenly as I spoke, and his piercing eyes seemed to read
my thought.  To my relief he said no more on the subject just then,
seeming to accept my words in simple faith. There was evidently in his
own mind some cause for the acceptance deeper than my own knowledge.
His eyes flashed, and there was an unconscious movement of the
mouth—it could hardly be called a twitch—which betokened
satisfaction.  He was following out some train of reasoning in his own
mind.  Suddenly he said:

“She thought I had been murdered!  Was that last night?”

“No! four days ago.”  He seemed surprised.  Whilst he had been speaking
the first time he had sat up in bed; now he made a movement as though
he would jump out. With an effort, however, he restrained himself;
leaning back on his pillows he said quietly:

“Tell me all about it!  All you know!  Every detail!  Omit nothing!
But stay; first lock the door!  I want to know, before I see anyone,
exactly how things stand.”

Somehow his last words made my heart leap.  “Anyone!”  He evidently
accepted me, then, as an exception.  In my present state of feeling for
his daughter, this was a comforting thought.  I felt exultant as I went
over to the door and softly turned the key.  When I came back I found
him sitting up again.  He said:

“Go on!”

Accordingly, I told him every detail, even of the slightest which I
could remember, of what had happened from the moment of my arrival at
the house.  Of course I said nothing of my feeling towards Margaret,
and spoke only concerning those things already within his own
knowledge. With regard to Corbeck, I simply said that he had brought
back some lamps of which he had been in quest.  Then I proceeded to
tell him fully of their loss, and of their re-discovery in the house.

He listened with a self-control which, under the circumstances, was to
me little less than marvellous.  It was impassiveness, for at times his
eyes would flash or blaze, and the strong fingers of his uninjured hand
would grip the sheet, pulling it into far-extending wrinkles.  This was
most noticeable when I told him of the return of Corbeck, and the
finding of the lamps in the boudoir.  At times he spoke, but only a few
words, and as if unconsciously in emotional comment.  The mysterious
parts, those which had most puzzled us, seemed to have no special
interest for him; he seemed to know them already.  The utmost concern
he showed was when I told him of Daw’s shooting.  His muttered comment:
“stupid ass!” together with a quick glance across the room at the
injured cabinet, marked the measure of his disgust.  As I told him of
his daughter’s harrowing anxiety for him, of her unending care and
devotion, of the tender love which she had shown, he seemed much moved.
There was a sort of veiled surprise in his unconscious whisper:

“Margaret!  Margaret!”

When I had finished my narration, bringing matters up to the moment
when Miss Trelawny had gone out for her walk—I thought of her as “Miss
Trelawny,” not as “Margaret” now, in the presence of her father—he
remained silent for quite a long time.  It was probably two or three
minutes; but it seemed interminable.  All at once he turned and said to
me briskly:

“Now tell me all about yourself!”  This was something of a floorer; I
felt myself grow red-hot.  Mr. Trelawny’s eyes were upon me; they were
now calm and inquiring, but never ceasing in their soul-searching
scrutiny.  There was just a suspicion of a smile on the mouth which,
though it added to my embarrassment, gave me a certain measure of
relief.  I was, however, face to face with difficulty; and the habit of
my life stood me in good stead.  I looked him straight in the eyes as I
spoke:

“My name, as I told you, is Ross, Malcolm Ross.  I am by profession a
Barrister.  I was made a Q. C. in the last year of the Queen’s reign.
I have been fairly successful in my work.”  To my relief he said:

“Yes, I know.  I have always heard well of you!  Where and when did you
meet Margaret?”

“First at the Hay’s in Belgrave Square, ten days ago.  Then at a picnic
up the river with Lady Strathconnell.  We went from Windsor to Cookham.
Mar—Miss Trelawny was in my boat.  I scull a little, and I had my own
boat at Windsor.  We had a good deal of conversation—naturally.”

“Naturally!” there was just a suspicion of something sardonic in the
tone of acquiescence; but there was no other intimation of his feeling.
I began to think that as I was in the presence of a strong man, I
should show something of my own strength.  My friends, and sometimes my
opponents, say that I am a strong man.  In my present circumstances,
not to be absolutely truthful would be to be weak.  So I stood up to
the difficulty before me; always bearing in mind, however, that my
words might affect Margaret’s happiness through her love for her
father.  I went on:

“In conversation at a place and time and amid surroundings so pleasing,
and in a solitude inviting to confidence, I got a glimpse of her inner
life.  Such a glimpse as a man of my years and experience may get from
a young girl!”  The father’s face grew graver as I went on; but he said
nothing.  I was committed now to a definite line of speech, and went on
with such mastery of my mind as I could exercise.  The occasion might
be fraught with serious consequences to me too.

“I could not but see that there was over her spirit a sense of
loneliness which was habitual to her.  I thought I understood it; I am
myself an only child.  I ventured to encourage her to speak to me
freely; and was happy enough to succeed.  A sort of confidence became
established between us.”  There was something in the father’s face
which made me add hurriedly:

“Nothing was said by her, sir, as you can well imagine, which was not
right and proper.  She only told me in the impulsive way of one longing
to give voice to thoughts long carefully concealed, of her yearning to
be closer to the father whom she loved; more en rapport with him; more
in his confidence; closer within the circle of his sympathies.  Oh,
believe me, sir, that it was all good!  All that a father’s heart could
hope or wish for!  It was all loyal!  That she spoke it to me was
perhaps because I was almost a stranger with whom there was no previous
barrier to confidence.”

Here I paused.  It was hard to go on; and I feared lest I might, in my
zeal, do Margaret a disservice.  The relief of the strain came from her
father.

“And you?”

“Sir, Miss Trelawny is very sweet and beautiful!  She is young; and her
mind is like crystal!  Her sympathy is a joy!  I am not an old man, and
my affections were not engaged.  They never had been till then.  I hope
I may say as much, even to a father!” My eyes involuntarily dropped.
When I raised them again Mr. Trelawny was still gazing at me keenly.
All the kindliness of his nature seemed to wreath itself in a smile as
he held out his hand and said:

“Malcolm Ross, I have always heard of you as a fearless and honourable
gentleman. I am glad my girl has such a friend!  Go on!”

My heart leaped.  The first step to the winning of Margaret’s father
was gained.  I dare say I was somewhat more effusive in my words and my
manner as I went on.  I certainly felt that way.

“One thing we gain as we grow older:  to use our age judiciously!  I
have had much experience.  I have fought for it and worked for it all
my life; and I felt that I was justified in using it.  I ventured to
ask Miss Trelawny to count on me as a friend; to let me serve her
should occasion arise.  She promised me that she would.  I had little
idea that my chance of serving her should come so soon or in such a
way; but that very night you were stricken down.  In her desolation and
anxiety she sent for me!” I paused.  He continued to look at me as I
went on:

“When your letter of instructions was found, I offered my services.
They were accepted, as you know.”

“And these days, how did they pass for you?”  The question startled me.
There was in it something of Margaret’s own voice and manner; something
so greatly resembling her lighter moments that it brought out all the
masculinity in me.  I felt more sure of my ground now as I said:

“These days, sir, despite all their harrowing anxiety, despite all the
pain they held for the girl whom I grew to love more and more with each
passing hour, have been the happiest of my life!”  He kept silence for
a long time; so long that, as I waited for him to speak, with my heart
beating, I began to wonder if my frankness had been too effusive.  At
last he said:

“I suppose it is hard to say so much vicariously.  Her poor mother
should have heard you; it would have made her heart glad!”  Then a
shadow swept across his face; and he went on more hurriedly.

“But are you quite sure of all this?”

“I know my own heart, sir; or, at least, I think I do!”

“No! no!” he answered, “I don’t mean you.  That is all right!  But you
spoke of my girl’s affection for me ... and yet...!  And yet she has
been living here, in my house, a whole year.... Still, she spoke to you
of her loneliness—her desolation.  I never—it grieves me to say it,
but it is true—I never saw sign of such affection towards myself in
all the year!...”  His voice trembled away into sad, reminiscent
introspection.

“Then, sir,” I said, “I have been privileged to see more in a few days
than you in her whole lifetime!”  My words seemed to call him up from
himself; and I thought that it was with pleasure as well as surprise
that he said:

“I had no idea of it.  I thought that she was indifferent to me.  That
what seemed like the neglect of her youth was revenging itself on me.
That she was cold of heart.... It is a joy unspeakable to me that her
mother’s daughter loves me too!” Unconsciously he sank back upon his
pillow, lost in memories of the past.

How he must have loved her mother!  It was the love of her mother’s
child, rather than the love of his own daughter, that appealed to him.
My heart went out to him in a great wave of sympathy and kindliness.  I
began to understand.  To understand the passion of these two great,
silent, reserved natures, that successfully concealed the burning
hunger for the other’s love!  It did not surprise me when presently he
murmured to himself:

“Margaret, my child!  Tender, and thoughtful, and strong, and true, and
brave!  Like her dear mother! like her dear mother!”

And then to the very depths of my heart I rejoiced that I had spoken so
frankly.

Presently Mr. Trelawny said:

“Four days!  The sixteenth!  Then this is the twentieth of July?”  I
nodded affirmation; he went on:

“So I have been lying in a trance for four days.  It is not the first
time.  I was in a trance once under strange conditions for three days;
and never even suspected it till I was told of the lapse of time.  I
shall tell you all about it some day, if you care to hear.”

That made me thrill with pleasure.  That he, Margaret’s father, would
so take me into his confidence made it possible.... The business-like,
every-day alertness of his voice as he spoke next quite recalled me:

“I had better get up now.  When Margaret comes in, tell her yourself
that I am all right.  It will avoid any shock!  And will you tell
Corbeck that I would like to see him as soon as I can.  I want to see
those lamps, and hear all about them!”

His attitude towards me filled me with delight.  There was a possible
father-in-law aspect that would have raised me from a death-bed.  I was
hurrying away to carry out his wishes; when, however, my hand was on
the key of the door, his voice recalled me:

“Mr. Ross!”

I did not like to hear him say “Mr.”  After he knew of my friendship
with his daughter he had called me Malcolm Ross; and this obvious
return to formality not only pained, but filled me with apprehension.
It must be something about Margaret.  I thought of her as “Margaret”
and not as “Miss Trelawny”, now that there was danger of losing her. I
know now what I felt then:  that I was determined to fight for her
rather than lose her.  I came back, unconsciously holding myself erect.
Mr. Trelawny, the keen observer of men, seemed to read my thought; his
face, which was set in a new anxiety, relaxed as he said:

“Sit down a minute; it is better that we speak now than later.  We are
both men, and men of the world.  All this about my daughter is very new
to me, and very sudden; and I want to know exactly how and where I
stand.  Mind, I am making no objection; but as a father I have duties
which are grave, and may prove to be painful.  I—I”—he seemed
slightly at a loss how to begin, and this gave me hope—“I suppose I am
to take it, from what you have said to me of your feelings towards my
girl, that it is in your mind to be a suitor for her hand, later on?”
I answered at once:

“Absolutely!  Firm and fixed; it was my intention the evening after I
had been with her on the river, to seek you, of course after a proper
and respectful interval, and to ask you if I might approach her on the
subject.  Events forced me into closer relationship more quickly than I
had to hope would be possible; but that first purpose has remained
fresh in my heart, and has grown in intensity, and multiplied itself
with every hour which has passed since then.”  His face seemed to
soften as he looked at me; the memory of his own youth was coming back
to him instinctively.  After a pause he said:

“I suppose I may take it, too, Malcolm Ross”—the return to the
familiarity of address swept through me with a glorious thrill—“that
as yet you have not made any protestation to my daughter?”

“Not in words, sir.”  The arriere pensee of my phrase struck me, not by
its own humour, but through the grave, kindly smile on the father’s
face.  There was a pleasant sarcasm in his comment:

“Not in words!  That is dangerous!  She might have doubted words, or
even disbelieved them.”

I felt myself blushing to the roots of my hair as I went on:

“The duty of delicacy in her defenceless position; my respect for her
father—I did not know you then, sir, as yourself, but only as her
father—restrained me.  But even had not these barriers existed, I
should not have dared in the presence of such grief and anxiety to have
declared myself.  Mr. Trelawny, I assure you on my word of honour that
your daughter and I are as yet, on her part, but friends and nothing
more!”  Once again he held out his hands, and we clasped each other
warmly.  Then he said heartily:

“I am satisfied, Malcolm Ross.  Of course, I take it that until I have
seen her and have given you permission, you will not make any
declaration to my daughter—in words,” he added, with an indulgent
smile. But his face became stern again as he went on:

“Time presses; and I have to think of some matters so urgent and so
strange that I dare not lose an hour.  Otherwise I should not have been
prepared to enter, at so short a notice and to so new a friend, on the
subject of my daughter’s settlement in life, and of her future
happiness.”  There was a dignity and a certain proudness in his manner
which impressed me much.

“I shall respect your wishes, sir!” I said as I went back and opened
the door.  I heard him lock it behind me.

When I told Mr. Corbeck that Mr. Trelawny had quite recovered, he began
to dance about like a wild man.  But he suddenly stopped, and asked me
to be careful not to draw any inferences, at all events at first, when
in the future speaking of the finding of the lamps, or of the first
visits to the tomb.  This was in case Mr. Trelawny should speak to me
on the subject; “as, of course, he will,” he added, with a sidelong
look at me which meant knowledge of the affairs of my heart.  I agreed
to this, feeling that it was quite right.  I did not quite understand
why; but I knew that Mr. Trelawny was a peculiar man.  In no case could
one make a mistake by being reticent. Reticence is a quality which a
strong man always respects.

The manner in which the others of the house took the news of the
recovery varied much.  Mrs. Grant wept with emotion; then she hurried
off to see if she could do anything personally, and to set the house in
order for “Master”, as she always called him.  The Nurse’s face fell:
she was deprived of an interesting case.  But the disappointment was
only momentary; and she rejoiced that the trouble was over. She was
ready to come to the patient the moment she should be wanted; but in
the meantime she occupied herself in packing her portmanteau.

I took Sergeant Daw into the study, so that we should be alone when I
told him the news.  It surprised even his iron self-control when I told
him the method of the waking.  I was myself surprised in turn by his
first words:

“And how did he explain the first attack?  He was unconscious when the
second was made.”

Up to that moment the nature of the attack, which was the cause of my
coming to the house, had never even crossed my mind, except when I had
simply narrated the various occurrences in sequence to Mr. Trelawny.
The Detective did not seem to think much of my answer:

“Do you know, it never occurred to me to ask him!”  The professional
instinct was strong in the man, and seemed to supersede everything else.

“That is why so few cases are ever followed out,” he said, “unless our
people are in them.  Your amateur detective never hunts down to the
death.  As for ordinary people, the moment things begin to mend, and
the strain of suspense is off them, they drop the matter in hand.  It
is like sea-sickness,” he added philosophically after a pause; “the
moment you touch the shore you never give it a thought, but run off to
the buffet to feed!  Well, Mr. Ross, I’m glad the case is over; for
over it is, so far as I am concerned.  I suppose that Mr. Trelawny
knows his own business; and that now he is well again, he will take it
up himself. Perhaps, however, he will not do anything. As he seemed to
expect something to happen, but did not ask for protection from the
police in any way, I take it that he don’t want them to interfere with
an eye to punishment.  We’ll be told officially, I suppose, that it was
an accident, or sleep-walking, or something of the kind, to satisfy the
conscience of our Record Department; and that will be the end.  As for
me, I tell you frankly, sir, that it will be the saving of me.  I
verily believe I was beginning to get dotty over it all.  There were
too many mysteries, that aren’t in my line, for me to be really
satisfied as to either facts or the causes of them.  Now I’ll be able
to wash my hands of it, and get back to clean, wholesome, criminal
work.  Of course, sir, I’ll be glad to know if you ever do light on a
cause of any kind.  And I’ll be grateful if you can ever tell me how
the man was dragged out of bed when the cat bit him, and who used the
knife the second time.  For master Silvio could never have done it by
himself.  But there! I keep thinking of it still.  I must look out and
keep a check on myself, or I shall think of it when I have to keep my
mind on other things!”

When Margaret returned from her walk, I met her in the hall.  She was
still pale and sad; somehow, I had expected to see her radiant after
her walk.  The moment she saw me her eyes brightened, and she looked at
me keenly.

“You have some good news for me?” she said.  “Is Father better?”

“He is!  Why did you think so?”

“I saw it in your face.  I must go to him at once.”  She was hurrying
away when I stopped her.

“He said he would send for you the moment he was dressed.”

“He said he would send for me!” she repeated in amazement.  “Then he is
awake again, and conscious?  I had no idea he was so well as that! O
Malcolm!”

She sat down on the nearest chair and began to cry.  I felt overcome
myself.  The sight of her joy and emotion, the mention of my own name
in such a way and at such a time, the rush of glorious possibilities
all coming together, quite unmanned me.  She saw my emotion, and seemed
to understand.  She put out her hand.  I held it hard, and kissed it.
Such moments as these, the opportunities of lovers, are gifts of the
gods! Up to this instant, though I knew I loved her, and though I
believed she returned my affection, I had had only hope.  Now, however,
the self-surrender manifest in her willingness to let me squeeze her
hand, the ardour of her pressure in return, and the glorious flush of
love in her beautiful, deep, dark eyes as she lifted them to mine, were
all the eloquences which the most impatient or exacting lover could
expect or demand.

No word was spoken; none was needed.  Even had I not been pledged to
verbal silence, words would have been poor and dull to express what we
felt.  Hand in hand, like two little children, we went up the staircase
and waited on the landing, till the summons from Mr. Trelawny should
come.

I whispered in her ear—it was nicer than speaking aloud and at a
greater distance—how her father had awakened, and what he had said;
and all that had passed between us, except when she herself had been
the subject of conversation.

Presently a bell rang from the room.  Margaret slipped from me, and
looked back with warning finger on lip.  She went over to her father’s
door and knocked softly.

“Come in!” said the strong voice.

“It is I, Father!”  The voice was tremulous with love and hope.

There was a quick step inside the room; the door was hurriedly thrown
open, and in an instant Margaret, who had sprung forward, was clasped
in her father’s arms. There was little speech; only a few broken
phrases.

“Father!  Dear, dear Father!”

“My child!  Margaret!  My dear, dear child!”

“O Father, Father!  At last!  At last!”

Here the father and daughter went into the room together, and the door
closed.




Chapter XIV

The Birth-Mark


During my waiting for the summons to Mr. Trelawny’s room, which I knew
would come, the time was long and lonely.  After the first few moments
of emotional happiness at Margaret’s joy, I somehow felt apart and
alone; and for a little time the selfishness of a lover possessed me.
But it was not for long.  Margaret’s happiness was all to me; and in
the conscious sense of it I lost my baser self.  Margaret’s last words
as the door closed on them gave the key to the whole situation, as it
had been and as it was.  These two proud, strong people, though father
and daughter, had only come to know each other when the girl was grown
up. Margaret’s nature was of that kind which matures early.

The pride and strength of each, and the reticence which was their
corollary, made a barrier at the beginning.  Each had respected the
other’s reticence too much thereafter; and the misunderstanding grew to
habit.  And so these two loving hearts, each of which yearned for
sympathy from the other, were kept apart.  But now all was well, and in
my heart of hearts I rejoiced that at last Margaret was happy.  Whilst
I was still musing on the subject, and dreaming dreams of a personal
nature, the door was opened, and Mr. Trelawny beckoned to me.

“Come in, Mr. Ross!” he said cordially, but with a certain formality
which I dreaded.  I entered the room, and he closed the door again.  He
held out his hand, and I put mine in it.  He did not let it go, but
still held it as he drew me over toward his daughter.  Margaret looked
from me to him, and back again; and her eyes fell.  When I was close to
her, Mr. Trelawny let go my hand, and, looking his daughter straight in
the face, said:

“If things are as I fancy, we shall not have any secrets between us.
Malcolm Ross knows so much of my affairs already, that I take it he
must either let matters stop where they are and go away in silence, or
else he must know more.  Margaret! are you willing to let Mr. Ross see
your wrist?”

She threw one swift look of appeal in his eyes; but even as she did so
she seemed to make up her mind.  Without a word she raised her right
hand, so that the bracelet of spreading wings which covered the wrist
fell back, leaving the flesh bare.  Then an icy chill shot through me.

On her wrist was a thin red jagged line, from which seemed to hang red
stains like drops of blood!

She stood there, a veritable figure of patient pride.

Oh! but she looked proud!  Through all her sweetness, all her dignity,
all her high-souled negation of self which I had known, and which never
seemed more marked than now—through all the fire that seemed to shine
from the dark depths of her eyes into my very soul, pride shone
conspicuously.  The pride that has faith; the pride that is born of
conscious purity; the pride of a veritable queen of Old Time, when to
be royal was to be the first and greatest and bravest in all high
things. As we stood thus for some seconds, the deep, grave voice of her
father seemed to sound a challenge in my ears:

“What do you say now?”

My answer was not in words.  I caught Margaret’s right hand in mine as
it fell, and, holding it tight, whilst with the other I pushed back the
golden cincture, stooped and kissed the wrist.  As I looked up at her,
but never letting go her hand, there was a look of joy on her face such
as I dream of when I think of heaven.  Then I faced her father.

“You have my answer, sir!”  His strong face looked gravely sweet.  He
only said one word as he laid his hand on our clasped ones, whilst he
bent over and kissed his daughter:

“Good!”

We were interrupted by a knock at the door.  In answer to an impatient
“Come in!” from Mr. Trelawny, Mr. Corbeck entered.  When he saw us
grouped he would have drawn back; but in an instant Mr. Trelawny had
sprung forth and dragged him forward.  As he shook him by both hands,
he seemed a transformed man.  All the enthusiasm of his youth, of which
Mr. Corbeck had told us, seemed to have come back to him in an instant.

“So you have got the lamps!” he almost shouted.  “My reasoning was
right after all. Come to the library, where we will be alone, and tell
me all about it!  And while he does it, Ross,” said he, turning to me,
“do you, like a good fellow, get the key from the safe deposit, so that
I may have a look at the lamps!”

Then the three of them, the daughter lovingly holding her father’s arm,
went into the library, whilst I hurried off to Chancery Lane.

When I returned with the key, I found them still engaged in the
narrative; but Doctor Winchester, who had arrived soon after I left,
was with them.  Mr. Trelawny, on hearing from Margaret of his great
attention and kindness, and how he had, under much pressure to the
contrary, steadfastly obeyed his written wishes, had asked him to
remain and listen.  “It will interest you, perhaps,” he said, “to learn
the end of the story!”

We all had an early dinner together.  We sat after it a good while, and
then Mr. Trelawny said:

“Now, I think we had all better separate and go quietly to bed early.
We may have much to talk about tomorrow; and tonight I want to think.”

Doctor Winchester went away, taking, with a courteous forethought, Mr.
Corbeck with him, and leaving me behind.  When the others had gone Mr.
Trelawny said:

“I think it will be well if you, too, will go home for tonight.  I want
to be quite alone with my daughter; there are many things I wish to
speak of to her, and to her alone. Perhaps, even tomorrow, I will be
able to tell you also of them; but in the meantime there will be less
distraction to us both if we are alone in the house.”  I quite
understood and sympathised with his feelings; but the experiences of
the last few days were strong on me, and with some hesitation I said:

“But may it not be dangerous?  If you knew as we do—”  To my surprise
Margaret interrupted me:

“There will be no danger, Malcolm.  I shall be with Father!”  As she
spoke she clung to him in a protective way.  I said no more, but stood
up to go at once.  Mr. Trelawny said heartily:

“Come as early as you please, Ross.  Come to breakfast.  After it, you
and I will want to have a word together.”  He went out of the room
quietly, leaving us together.  I clasped and kissed Margaret’s hands,
which she held out to me, and then drew her close to me, and our lips
met for the first time.

I did not sleep much that night.  Happiness on the one side of my bed
and Anxiety on the other kept sleep away.  But if I had anxious care, I
had also happiness which had not equal in my life—or ever can have.
The night went by so quickly that the dawn seemed to rush on me, not
stealing as is its wont.

Before nine o’clock I was at Kensington.  All anxiety seemed to float
away like a cloud as I met Margaret, and saw that already the pallor of
her face had given to the rich bloom which I knew.  She told me that
her father had slept well, and that he would be with us soon.

“I do believe,” she whispered, “that my dear and thoughtful Father has
kept back on purpose, so that I might meet you first, and alone!”

After breakfast Mr. Trelawny took us into the study, saying as he
passed in:

“I have asked Margaret to come too.”  When we were seated, he said
gravely:

“I told you last night that we might have something to say to each
other.  I dare say that you may have thought that it was about Margaret
and yourself.  Isn’t that so?”

“I thought so.”

“Well, my boy, that is all right.  Margaret and I have been talking,
and I know her wishes.”  He held out his hand.  When I wrung it, and
had kissed Margaret, who drew her chair close to mine, so that we could
hold hands as we listened, he went on, but with a certain
hesitation—it could hardly be called nervousness—which was new to me.

“You know a good deal of my hunt after this mummy and her belongings;
and I dare say you have guessed a good deal of my theories.  But these
at any rate I shall explain later, concisely and categorically, if it
be necessary.  What I want to consult you about now is this:  Margaret
and I disagree on one point.  I am about to make an experiment; the
experiment which is to crown all that I have devoted twenty years of
research, and danger, and labour to prepare for.  Through it we may
learn things that have been hidden from the eyes and the knowledge of
men for centuries; for scores of centuries.  I do not want my daughter
to be present; for I cannot blind myself to the fact that there may be
danger in it—great danger, and of an unknown kind.  I have, however,
already faced very great dangers, and of an unknown kind; and so has
that brave scholar who has helped me in the work.  As to myself, I am
willing to run any risk.  For science, and history, and philosophy may
benefit; and we may turn one old page of a wisdom unknown in this
prosaic age.  But for my daughter to run such a risk I am loth.  Her
young bright life is too precious to throw lightly away; now especially
when she is on the very threshold of new happiness.  I do not wish to
see her life given, as her dear mother’s was—”

He broke down for a moment, and covered his eyes with his hands.  In an
instant Margaret was beside him, clasping him close, and kissing him,
and comforting him with loving words.  Then, standing erect, with one
hand on his head, she said:

“Father! mother did not bid you stay beside her, even when you wanted
to go on that journey of unknown danger to Egypt; though that country
was then upset from end to end with war and the dangers that follow
war. You have told me how she left you free to go as you wished; though
that she thought of danger for you and feared it for you, is proved
by this!”  She held up her wrist with the scar that seemed to run
blood. “Now, mother’s daughter does as mother would have done herself!”
Then she turned to me:

“Malcolm, you know I love you!  But love is trust; and you must trust
me in danger as well as in joy.  You and I must stand beside Father in
this unknown peril. Together we shall come through it; or together we
shall fail; together we shall die. That is my wish; my first wish to my
husband that is to be!  Do you not think that, as a daughter, I am
right?  Tell my Father what you think!”

She looked like a Queen stooping to plead.  My love for her grew and
grew.  I stood up beside her; and took her hand and said:

“Mr. Trelawny! in this Margaret and I are one!”

He took both our hands and held them hard.  Presently he said with deep
emotion:

“It is as her mother would have done!”

Mr. Corbeck and Doctor Winchester came exactly at the time appointed,
and joined us in the library.  Despite my great happiness I felt our
meeting to be a very solemn function.  For I could never forget the
strange things that had been; and the idea of the strange things which
might be, was with me like a cloud, pressing down on us all.  From the
gravity of my companions I gathered that each of them also was ruled by
some such dominating thought.

Instinctively we gathered our chairs into a circle round Mr. Trelawny,
who had taken the great arm-chair near the window.  Margaret sat by him
on his right, and I was next to her.  Mr. Corbeck was on his left, with
Doctor Winchester on the other side. After a few seconds of silence Mr.
Trelawny said to Mr. Corbeck:

“You have told Doctor Winchester all up to the present, as we arranged?”

“Yes,” he answered; so Mr. Trelawny said:

“And I have told Margaret, so we all know!”  Then, turning to the
Doctor, he asked:

“And am I to take it that you, knowing all as we know it who have
followed the matter for years, wish to share in the experiment which we
hope to make?”  His answer was direct and uncompromising:

“Certainly!  Why, when this matter was fresh to me, I offered to go on
with it to the end.  Now that it is of such strange interest, I would
not miss it for anything which you could name.  Be quite easy in your
mind, Mr. Trelawny.  I am a scientist and an investigator of phenomena.
I have no one belonging to me or dependent on me.  I am quite alone,
and free to do what I like with my own—including my life!”  Mr.
Trelawny bowed gravely, and turning to Mr. Corbeck said:

“I have known your ideas for many years past, old friend; so I need ask
you nothing. As to Margaret and Malcolm Ross, they have already told me
their wishes in no uncertain way.”  He paused a few seconds, as though
to put his thoughts or his words in order; then he began to explain his
views and intentions.  He spoke very carefully, seeming always to bear
in mind that some of us who listened were ignorant of the very root and
nature of some things touched upon, and explaining them to us as he
went on:

“The experiment which is before us is to try whether or no there is any
force, any reality, in the old Magic.  There could not possibly be more
favourable conditions for the test; and it is my own desire to do all
that is possible to make the original design effective.  That there is
some such existing power I firmly believe.  It might not be possible to
create, or arrange, or organise such a power in our own time; but I
take it that if in Old Time such a power existed, it may have some
exceptional survival.  After all, the Bible is not a myth; and we read
there that the sun stood still at a man’s command, and that an ass—not
a human one—spoke.  And if the Witch at Endor could call up to Saul
the spirit of Samuel, why may not there have been others with equal
powers; and why may not one among them survive?  Indeed, we are told in
the Book of Samuel that the Witch of Endor was only one of many, and
her being consulted by Saul was a matter of chance.  He only sought one
among the many whom he had driven out of Israel; ‘all those that had
Familiar Spirits, and the Wizards.’  This Egyptian Queen, Tera, who
reigned nearly two thousand years before Saul, had a Familiar, and was
a Wizard too.  See how the priests of her time, and those after it
tried to wipe out her name from the face of the earth, and put a curse
over the very door of her tomb so that none might ever discover the
lost name.  Ay, and they succeeded so well that even Manetho, the
historian of the Egyptian Kings, writing in the tenth century before
Christ, with all the lore of the priesthood for forty centuries behind
him, and with possibility of access to every existing record, could not
even find her name.  Did it strike any of you, in thinking of the late
events, who or what her Familiar was?”  There was an interruption, for
Doctor Winchester struck one hand loudly on the other as he ejaculated:

“The cat!  The mummy cat!  I knew it!”  Mr. Trelawny smiled over at him.

“You are right!  There is every indication that the Familiar of the
Wizard Queen was that cat which was mummied when she was, and was not
only placed in her tomb, but was laid in the sarcophagus with her.
That was what bit into my wrist, what cut me with sharp claws.”  He
paused. Margaret’s comment was a purely girlish one:

“Then my poor Silvio is acquitted!  I am glad!”  Her father stroked her
hair and went on:

“This woman seems to have had an extraordinary foresight.  Foresight
far, far beyond her age and the philosophy of her time.  She seems to
have seen through the weakness of her own religion, and even prepared
for emergence into a different world.  All her aspirations were for the
North, the point of the compass whence blew the cool invigorating
breezes that make life a joy.  From the first, her eyes seem to have
been attracted to the seven stars of the Plough from the fact, as
recorded in the hieroglyphics in her tomb, that at her birth a great
aerolite fell, from whose heart was finally extracted that Jewel of
Seven Stars which she regarded as the talisman of her life.  It seems
to have so far ruled her destiny that all her thought and care circled
round it.  The Magic Coffer, so wondrously wrought with seven sides, we
learn from the same source, came from the aerolite.  Seven was to her a
magic number; and no wonder.  With seven fingers on one hand, and seven
toes on one foot.  With a talisman of a rare ruby with seven stars in
the same position as in that constellation which ruled her birth, each
star of the seven having seven points—in itself a geological
wonder—it would have been odd if she had not been attracted by it.
Again, she was born, we learn in the Stele of her tomb, in the seventh
month of the year—the month beginning with the Inundation of the Nile.
Of which month the presiding Goddess was Hathor, the Goddess of her own
house, of the Antefs of the Theban line—the Goddess who in various
forms symbolises beauty, and pleasure, and resurrection.  Again, in
this seventh month—which, by later Egyptian astronomy began on October
28th, and ran to the 27th of our November—on the seventh day the
Pointer of the Plough just rises above the horizon of the sky at Thebes.

“In a marvellously strange way, therefore, are grouped into this
woman’s life these various things.  The number seven; the Pole Star,
with the constellation of seven stars; the God of the month, Hathor,
who was her own particular God, the God of her family, the Antefs of
the Theban Dynasty, whose Kings’ symbol it was, and whose seven forms
ruled love and the delights of life and resurrection.  If ever there
was ground for magic; for the power of symbolism carried into mystic
use; for a belief in finites spirits in an age which knew not the
Living God, it is here.

“Remember, too, that this woman was skilled in all the science of her
time.  Her wise and cautious father took care of that, knowing that by
her own wisdom she must ultimately combat the intrigues of the
Hierarchy.  Bear in mind that in old Egypt the science of Astronomy
began and was developed to an extraordinary height; and that Astrology
followed Astronomy in its progress.  And it is possible that in the
later developments of science with regard to light rays, we may yet
find that Astrology is on a scientific basis.  Our next wave of
scientific thought may deal with this.  I shall have something special
to call your minds to on this point presently.  Bear in mind also that
the Egyptians knew sciences, of which today, despite all our
advantages, we are profoundly ignorant.  Acoustics, for instance, an
exact science with the builders of the temples of Karnak, of Luxor, of
the Pyramids, is today a mystery to Bell, and Kelvin, and Edison, and
Marconi.  Again, these old miracle-workers probably understood some
practical way of using other forces, and amongst them the forces of
light that at present we do not dream of.  But of this matter I shall
speak later.  That Magic Coffer of Queen Tera is probably a magic box
in more ways than one.  It may—possibly it does—contain forces that
we wot not of.  We cannot open it; it must be closed from within.  How
then was it closed?  It is a coffer of solid stone, of amazing
hardness, more like a jewel than an ordinary marble, with a lid equally
solid; and yet all is so finely wrought that the finest tool made today
cannot be inserted under the flange.  How was it wrought to such
perfection?  How was the stone so chosen that those translucent patches
match the relations of the seven stars of the constellation?  How is
it, or from what cause, that when the starlight shines on it, it glows
from within—that when I fix the lamps in similar form the glow grows
greater still; and yet the box is irresponsive to ordinary light
however great?  I tell you that that box hides some great mystery of
science.  We shall find that the light will open it in some way:
either by striking on some substance, sensitive in a peculiar way to
its effect, or in releasing some greater power.  I only trust that in
our ignorance we may not so bungle things as to do harm to its
mechanism; and so deprive the knowledge of our time of a lesson handed
down, as by a miracle, through nearly five thousand years.

“In another way, too, there may be hidden in that box secrets which,
for good or ill, may enlighten the world.  We know from their records,
and inferentially also, that the Egyptians studied the properties of
herbs and minerals for magic purposes—white magic as well as black.
We know that some of the wizards of old could induce from sleep dreams
of any given kind.  That this purpose was mainly effected by hypnotism,
which was another art or science of Old Nile, I have little doubt.  But
still, they must have had a mastery of drugs that is far beyond
anything we know.  With our own pharmacopoeia we can, to a certain
extent, induce dreams.  We may even differentiate between good and
bad—dreams of pleasure, or disturbing and harrowing dreams.  But these
old practitioners seemed to have been able to command at will any form
or colour of dreaming; could work round any given subject or thought in
almost any was required.  In that coffer, which you have seen, may rest
a very armoury of dreams.  Indeed, some of the forces that lie within
it may have been already used in my household.”  Again there was an
interruption from Doctor Winchester.

“But if in your case some of these imprisoned forces were used, what
set them free at the opportune time, or how?  Besides, you and Mr.
Corbeck were once before put into a trance for three whole days, when
you were in the Queen’s tomb for the second time.  And then, as I
gathered from Mr. Corbeck’s story, the coffer was not back in the tomb,
though the mummy was.  Surely in both these cases there must have been
some active intelligence awake, and with some other power to wield.”
Mr. Trelawny’s answer was equally to the point:

“There was some active intelligence awake.  I am convinced of it.  And
it wielded a power which it never lacks.  I believe that on both those
occasions hypnotism was the power wielded.”

“And wherein is that power contained?  What view do you hold on the
subject?” Doctor Winchester’s voice vibrated with the intensity of his
excitement as he leaned forward, breathing hard, and with eyes staring.
Mr. Trelawny said solemnly:

“In the mummy of the Queen Tera!  I was coming to that presently.
Perhaps we had better wait till I clear the ground a little.  What I
hold is, that the preparation of that box was made for a special
occasion; as indeed were all the preparations of the tomb and all
belonging to it.  Queen Tera did not trouble herself to guard against
snakes and scorpions, in that rocky tomb cut in the sheer cliff face a
hundred feet above the level of the valley, and fifty down from the
summit.  Her precautions were against the disturbances of human hands;
against the jealousy and hatred of the priests, who, had they known of
her real aims, would have tried to baffle them.  From her point of
view, she made all ready for the time of resurrection, whenever that
might be. I gather from the symbolic pictures in the tomb that she so
far differed from the belief of her time that she looked for a
resurrection in the flesh.  It was doubtless this that intensified the
hatred of the priesthood, and gave them an acceptable cause for
obliterating the very existence, present and future, of one who had
outraged their theories and blasphemed their gods.  All that she might
require, either in the accomplishment of the resurrection or after it,
were contained in that almost hermetically sealed suite of chambers in
the rock.  In the great sarcophagus, which as you know is of a size
quite unusual even for kings, was the mummy of her Familiar, the cat,
which from its great size I take to be a sort of tiger-cat.  In the
tomb, also in a strong receptacle, were the canopic jars usually
containing those internal organs which are separately embalmed, but
which in this case had no such contents.  So that, I take it, there was
in her case a departure in embalming; and that the organs were restored
to the body, each in its proper place—if, indeed, they had ever been
removed.  If this surmise be true, we shall find that the brain of the
Queen either was never extracted in the usual way, or, if so taken out,
that it was duly replaced, instead of being enclosed within the mummy
wrappings. Finally, in the sarcophagus there was the Magic Coffer on
which her feet rested.  Mark you also, the care taken in the
preservance of her power to control the elements.  According to her
belief, the open hand outside the wrappings controlled the Air, and the
strange Jewel Stone with the shining stars controlled Fire.  The
symbolism inscribed on the soles of her feet gave sway over Land and
Water.  About the Star Stone I shall tell you later; but whilst we are
speaking of the sarcophagus, mark how she guarded her secret in case of
grave-wrecking or intrusion.  None could open her Magic Coffer without
the lamps, for we know now that ordinary light will not be effective.
The great lid of the sarcophagus was not sealed down as usual, because
she wished to control the air. But she hid the lamps, which in
structure belong to the Magic Coffer, in a place where none could find
them, except by following the secret guidance which she had prepared
for only the eyes of wisdom.  And even here she had guarded against
chance discovery, by preparing a bolt of death for the unwary
discoverer.  To do this she had applied the lesson of the tradition of
the avenging guard of the treasures of the pyramid, built by her great
predecessor of the Fourth Dynasty of the throne of Egypt.

“You have noted, I suppose, how there were, in the case of her tomb,
certain deviations from the usual rules.  For instance, the shaft of
the Mummy Pit, which is usually filled up solid with stones and
rubbish, was left open.  Why was this?  I take it that she had made
arrangements for leaving the tomb when, after her resurrection, she
should be a new woman, with a different personality, and less inured to
the hardships that in her first existence she had suffered.  So far as
we can judge of her intent, all things needful for her exit into the
world had been thought of, even to the iron chain, described by Van
Huyn, close to the door in the rock, by which she might be able to
lower herself to the ground.  That she expected a long period to elapse
was shown in the choice of material.  An ordinary rope would be
rendered weaker or unsafe in process of time, but she imagined, and
rightly, that the iron would endure.

“What her intentions were when once she trod the open earth afresh we
do not know, and we never shall, unless her own dead lips can soften
and speak.”




Chapter XV

The Purpose of Queen Tera


“Now, as to the Star Jewel!  This she manifestly regarded as the
greatest of her treasures.  On it she had engraven words which none of
her time dared to speak.

“In the old Egyptian belief it was held that there were words, which,
if used properly—for the method of speaking them was as important as
the words themselves—could command the Lords of the Upper and the
Lower Worlds.  The ‘hekau’, or word of power, was all-important in
certain ritual.  On the Jewel of Seven Stars, which, as you know, is
carved into the image of a scarab, are graven in hieroglyphic two such
hekau, one above, the other underneath.  But you will understand better
when you see it!  Wait here!  Do not stir!”

As he spoke, he rose and left the room.  A great fear for him came over
me; but I was in some strange way relieved when I looked at Margaret.
Whenever there had been any possibility of danger to her father, she
had shown great fear for him; now she was calm and placid.  I said
nothing, but waited.

In two or three minutes, Mr. Trelawny returned.  He held in his hand a
little golden box.  This, as he resumed his seat, he placed before him
on the table.  We all leaned forward as he opened it.

On a lining of white satin lay a wondrous ruby of immense size, almost
as big as the top joint of Margaret’s little finger.  It was carven—it
could not possibly have been its natural shape, but jewels do not show
the working of the tool—into the shape of a scarab, with its wings
folded, and its legs and feelers pressed back to its sides. Shining
through its wondrous “pigeon’s blood” colour were seven different
stars, each of seven points, in such position that they reproduced
exactly the figure of the Plough.  There could be no possible mistake
as to this in the mind of anyone who had ever noted the constellation.
On it were some hieroglyphic figures, cut with the most exquisite
precision, as I could see when it came to my turn to use the
magnifying-glass, which Mr. Trelawny took from his pocket and handed to
us.

When we all had seen it fully, Mr. Trelawny turned it over so that it
rested on its back in a cavity made to hold it in the upper half of the
box.  The reverse was no less wonderful than the upper, being carved to
resemble the under side of the beetle.  It, too, had some hieroglyphic
figures cut on it.  Mr. Trelawny resumed his lecture as we all sat with
our heads close to this wonderful jewel:

“As you see, there are two words, one on the top, the other underneath.
The symbols on the top represent a single word, composed of one
syllable prolonged, with its determinatives.  You know, all of you, I
suppose, that the Egyptian language was phonetic, and that the
hieroglyphic symbol represented the sound.  The first symbol here, the
hoe, means ‘mer’, and the two pointed ellipses the prolongation of the
final r: mer-r-r.  The sitting figure with the hand to its face is what
we call the ‘determinative’ of ‘thought’; and the roll of papyrus that
of ‘abstraction’.  Thus we get the word ‘mer’, love, in its abstract,
general, and fullest sense.  This is the hekau which can command the
Upper World.”

Margaret’s face was a glory as she said in a deep, low, ringing tone:

“Oh, but it is true.  How the old wonder-workers guessed at almighty
Truth!”  Then a hot blush swept her face, and her eyes fell.  Her
father smiled at her lovingly as he resumed:

“The symbolisation of the word on the reverse is simpler, though the
meaning is more abstruse.  The first symbol means ‘men’, ‘abiding’, and
the second, ‘ab’, ‘the heart’.  So that we get ‘abiding of heart’, or
in our own language ‘patience’.  And this is the hekau to control the
Lower World!”

He closed the box, and motioning us to remain as we were, he went back
to his room to replace the Jewel in the safe.  When he had returned and
resumed his seat, he went on:

“That Jewel, with its mystic words, and which Queen Tera held under her
hand in the sarcophagus, was to be an important factor—probably the
most important—in the working out of the act of her resurrection.
From the first I seemed by a sort of instinct to realise this.  I kept
the Jewel within my great safe, whence none could extract it; not even
Queen Tera herself with her astral body.”

“Her ‘astral body’?  What is that, Father?  What does that mean?” There
was a keenness in Margaret’s voice as she asked the question which
surprised me a little; but Trelawny smiled a sort of indulgent parental
smile, which came through his grim solemnity like sunshine through a
rifted cloud, as he spoke:

“The astral body, which is a part of Buddhist belief, long subsequent
to the time I speak of, and which is an accepted fact of modern
mysticism, had its rise in Ancient Egypt; at least, so far as we know.
It is that the gifted individual can at will, quick as thought itself,
transfer his body whithersoever he chooses, by the dissolution and
reincarnation of particles.  In the ancient belief there were several
parts of a human being.  You may as well know them; so that you will
understand matters relative to them or dependent on them as they occur.

“First there is the ‘Ka’, or ‘Double’, which, as Doctor Budge explains,
may be defined as ‘an abstract individuality of personality’ which was
imbued with all the characteristic attributes of the individual it
represented, and possessed an absolutely independent existence.  It was
free to move from place to place on earth at will; and it could enter
into heaven and hold converse with the gods.  Then there was the ‘Ba’,
or ‘soul’, which dwelt in the ‘Ka’, and had the power of becoming
corporeal or incorporeal at will; ‘it had both substance and form....
It had power to leave the tomb.... It could revisit the body in the
tomb ... and could reincarnate it and hold converse with it.’  Again
there was the ‘Khu’, the ‘spiritual intelligence’, or spirit. It took
the form of ‘a shining, luminous, intangible shape of the body.’...
Then, again, there was the ‘Sekhem’, or ‘power’ of a man, his strength
or vital force personified.  These were the ‘Khaibit’, or ‘shadow’, the
‘Ren’, or ‘name’, the ‘Khat’, or ‘physical body’, and ‘Ab’, the
‘heart’, in which life was seated, went to the full making up of a man.

“Thus you will see, that if this division of functions, spiritual and
bodily, ethereal and corporeal, ideal and actual, be accepted as exact,
there are all the possibilities and capabilities of corporeal
transference, guided always by an unimprisonable will or intelligence.”
As he paused I murmured the lines from Shelley’s “Prometheus Unbound”:

     “‘The Magnus Zoroaster....
     Met his own image walking in the garden.’”

Mr. Trelawny was not displeased.  “Quite so!” he said, in his quiet
way. “Shelley had a better conception of ancient beliefs than any of
our poets.”  With a voice changed again he resumed his lecture, for so
it was to some of us:

“There is another belief of the ancient Egyptian which you must bear in
mind; that regarding the ushaptiu figures of Osiris, which were placed
with the dead to its work in the Under World.  The enlargement of this
idea came to a belief that it was possible to transmit, by magical
formulae, the soul and qualities of any living creature to a figure
made in its image.  This would give a terrible extension of power to
one who held the gift of magic.

“It is from a union of these various beliefs, and their natural
corollaries, that I have come to the conclusion that Queen Tera
expected to be able to effect her own resurrection, when, and where,
and how, she would.  That she may have held before her a definite time
for making her effort is not only possible but likely.  I shall not
stop now to explain it, but shall enter upon the subject later on.
With a soul with the Gods, a spirit which could wander the earth at
will, and a power of corporeal transference, or an astral body, there
need be no bounds or limits to her ambition. The belief is forced upon
us that for these forty or fifty centuries she lay dormant in her
tomb—waiting.  Waiting with that ‘patience’ which could rule the Gods
of the Under World, for that ‘love’ which could command those of the
Upper World.  What she may have dreamt we know not; but her dream must
have been broken when the Dutch explorer entered her sculptured cavern,
and his follower violated the sacred privacy of her tomb by his rude
outrage in the theft of her hand.

“That theft, with all that followed, proved to us one thing, however:
that each part of her body, though separated from the rest, can be a
central point or rallying place for the items or particles of her
astral body.  That hand in my room could ensure her instantaneous
presence in the flesh, and its equally rapid dissolution.

“Now comes the crown of my argument.  The purpose of the attack on me
was to get the safe open, so that the sacred Jewel of Seven Stars could
be extracted.  That immense door of the safe could not keep out her
astral body, which, or any part of it, could gather itself as well
within as without the safe.  And I doubt not that in the darkness of
the night that mummied hand sought often the Talisman Jewel, and drew
new inspiration from its touch.  But despite all its power, the astral
body could not remove the Jewel through the chinks of the safe.  The
Ruby is not astral; and it could only be moved in the ordinary way by
the opening of the doors.  To this end, the Queen used her astral body
and the fierce force of her Familiar, to bring to the keyhole of the
safe the master key which debarred her wish.  For years I have
suspected, nay, have believed as much; and I, too, guarded myself
against powers of the Nether World.  I, too, waited in patience till I
should have gathered together all the factors required for the opening
of the Magic Coffer and the resurrection of the mummied Queen!”  He
paused, and his daughter’s voice came out sweet and clear, and full of
intense feeling:

“Father, in the Egyptian belief, was the power of resurrection of a
mummied body a general one, or was it limited?  That is:  could it
achieve resurrection many times in the course of ages; or only once,
and that one final?”

“There was but one resurrection,” he answered.  “There were some who
believed that this was to be a definite resurrection of the body into
the real world.  But in the common belief, the Spirit found joy in the
Elysian Fields, where there was plenty of food and no fear of famine.
Where there was moisture and deep-rooted reeds, and all the joys that
are to be expected by the people of an arid land and burning clime.”

Then Margaret spoke with an earnestness which showed the conviction of
her inmost soul:

“To me, then, it is given to understand what was the dream of this
great and far-thinking and high-souled lady of old; the dream that held
her soul in patient waiting for its realisation through the passing of
all those tens of centuries.  The dream of a love that might be; a love
that she felt she might, even under new conditions, herself evoke.  The
love that is the dream of every woman’s life; of the Old and of the
New; Pagan or Christian; under whatever sun; in whatever rank or
calling; however may have been the joy or pain of her life in other
ways.  Oh!  I know it!  I know it!  I am a woman, and I know a woman’s
heart.  What were the lack of food or the plenitude of it; what were
feast or famine to this woman, born in a palace, with the shadow of the
Crown of the Two Egypts on her brows!  What were reedy morasses or the
tinkle of running water to her whose barges could sweep the great Nile
from the mountains to the sea.  What were petty joys and absence of
petty fears to her, the raising of whose hand could hurl armies, or
draw to the water-stairs of her palaces the commerce of the world!  At
whose word rose temples filled with all the artistic beauty of the
Times of Old which it was her aim and pleasure to restore!  Under whose
guidance the solid rock yawned into the sepulchre that she designed!

“Surely, surely, such a one had nobler dreams!  I can feel them in my
heart; I can see them with my sleeping eyes!”

As she spoke she seemed to be inspired; and her eyes had a far-away
look as though they saw something beyond mortal sight.  And then the
deep eyes filled up with unshed tears of great emotion.  The very soul
of the woman seemed to speak in her voice; whilst we who listened sat
entranced.

“I can see her in her loneliness and in the silence of her mighty
pride, dreaming her own dream of things far different from those around
her. Of some other land, far, far away under the canopy of the silent
night, lit by the cool, beautiful light of the stars.  A land under
that Northern star, whence blew the sweet winds that cooled the
feverish desert air.  A land of wholesome greenery, far, far away.
Where were no scheming and malignant priesthood; whose ideas were to
lead to power through gloomy temples and more gloomy caverns of the
dead, through an endless ritual of death!  A land where love was not
base, but a divine possession of the soul!  Where there might be some
one kindred spirit which could speak to hers through mortal lips like
her own; whose being could merge with hers in a sweet communion of soul
to soul, even as their breaths could mingle in the ambient air!  I know
the feeling, for I have shared it myself.  I may speak of it now, since
the blessing has come into my own life.  I may speak of it since it
enables me to interpret the feelings, the very longing soul, of that
sweet and lovely Queen, so different from her surroundings, so high
above her time! Whose nature, put into a word, could control the forces
of the Under World; and the name of whose aspiration, though but graven
on a star-lit jewel, could command all the powers in the Pantheon of
the High Gods.

“And in the realisation of that dream she will surely be content to
rest!”

We men sat silent, as the young girl gave her powerful interpretation
of the design or purpose of the woman of old.  Her every word and tone
carried with it the conviction of her own belief.  The loftiness of her
thoughts seemed to uplift us all as we listened.  Her noble words,
flowing in musical cadence and vibrant with internal force, seemed to
issue from some great instrument of elemental power.  Even her tone was
new to us all; so that we listened as to some new and strange being
from a new and strange world.  Her father’s face was full of delight.
I knew now its cause.  I understood the happiness that had come into
his life, on his return to the world that he knew, from that prolonged
sojourn in the world of dreams.  To find in his daughter, whose nature
he had never till now known, such a wealth of affection, such a
splendour of spiritual insight, such a scholarly imagination, such...
The rest of his feeling was of hope!

The two other men were silent unconsciously.  One man had had his
dreaming; for the other, his dreams were to come.

For myself, I was like one in a trance.  Who was this new, radiant
being who had won to existence out of the mist and darkness of our
fears? Love has divine possibilities for the lover’s heart!  The wings
of the soul may expand at any time from the shoulders of the loved one,
who then may sweep into angel form.  I knew that in my Margaret’s
nature were divine possibilities of many kinds.  When under the shade
of the overhanging willow-tree on the river, I had gazed into the
depths of her beautiful eyes, I had thenceforth a strict belief in the
manifold beauties and excellences of her nature; but this soaring and
understanding spirit was, indeed, a revelation.  My pride, like her
father’s, was outside myself; my joy and rapture were complete and
supreme!

When we had all got back to earth again in our various ways, Mr.
Trelawny, holding his daughter’s hand in his, went on with his
discourse:

“Now, as to the time at which Queen Tera intended her resurrection to
take place! We are in contact with some of the higher astronomical
calculations in connection with true orientation.  As you know, the
stars shift their relative positions in the heavens; but though the
real distances traversed are beyond all ordinary comprehension, the
effects as we see them are small.  Nevertheless, they are susceptible
of measurement, not by years, indeed, but by centuries.  It was by this
means that Sir John Herschel arrived at the date of the building of the
Great Pyramid—a date fixed by the time necessary to change the star of
the true north from Draconis to the Pole Star, and since then verified
by later discoveries.  From the above there can be no doubt whatever
that astronomy was an exact science with the Egyptians at least a
thousand years before the time of Queen Tera.  Now, the stars that go
to make up a constellation change in process of time their relative
positions, and the Plough is a notable example.  The changes in the
position of stars in even forty centuries is so small as to be hardly
noticeable by an eye not trained to minute observances, but they can be
measured and verified.  Did you, or any of you, notice how exactly the
stars in the Ruby correspond to the position of the stars in the
Plough; or how the same holds with regard to the translucent places in
the Magic Coffer?”

We all assented.  He went on:

“You are quite correct.  They correspond exactly.  And yet when Queen
Tera was laid in her tomb, neither the stars in the Jewel nor the
translucent places in the Coffer corresponded to the position of the
stars in the Constellation as they then were!”

We looked at each other as he paused:  a new light was breaking upon
us. With a ring of mastery in his voice he went on:

“Do you not see the meaning of this?  Does it not throw a light on the
intention of the Queen?  She, who was guided by augury, and magic, and
superstition, naturally chose a time for her resurrection which seemed
to have been pointed out by the High Gods themselves, who had sent
their message on a thunderbolt from other worlds.  When such a time was
fixed by supernal wisdom, would it not be the height of human wisdom to
avail itself of it?  Thus it is”—here his voice deepened and trembled
with the intensity of his feeling—“that to us and our time is given
the opportunity of this wondrous peep into the old world, such as has
been the privilege of none other of our time; which may never be again.

“From first to last the cryptic writing and symbolism of that wondrous
tomb of that wondrous woman is full of guiding light; and the key of
the many mysteries lies in that most wondrous Jewel which she held in
her dead hand over the dead heart, which she hoped and believed would
beat again in a newer and nobler world!

“There are only loose ends now to consider.  Margaret has given us the
true inwardness of the feeling of the other Queen!”  He looked at her
fondly, and stroked her hand as he said it.  “For my own part I
sincerely hope she is right; for in such case it will be a joy, I am
sure, to all of us to assist at such a realisation of hope.  But we
must not go too fast, or believe too much in our present state of
knowledge. The voice that we hearken for comes out of times strangely
other than our own; when human life counted for little, and when the
morality of the time made little account of the removing of obstacles
in the way to achievement of  desire. We must keep our eyes fixed on
the scientific side, and wait for the developments on the psychic side.

“Now, as to this stone box, which we call the Magic Coffer.  As I have
said, I am convinced that it opens only in obedience to some principle
of light, or the exercise of some of its forces at present unknown to
us.  There is here much ground for conjecture and for experiment; for
as yet the scientists have not thoroughly differentiated the kinds, and
powers, and degrees of light.  Without analysing various rays we may, I
think, take it for granted that there are different qualities and
powers of light; and this great field of scientific investigation is
almost virgin soil.  We know as yet so little of natural forces, that
imagination need set no bounds to its flights in considering the
possibilities of the future.  Within but a few years we have made such
discoveries as two centuries ago would have sent the discoverers to
the flames.  The liquefaction of oxygen; the existence of radium, of
helium, of polonium, of argon; the different powers of Roentgen and
Cathode and Bequerel rays.  And as we may finally prove that there are
different kinds and qualities of light, so we may find that combustion
may have its own powers of differentiation; that there are qualities in
some flames non-existent in others.  It may be that some of the
essential conditions of substance are continuous, even in the
destruction of their bases. Last night I was thinking of this, and
reasoning that as there are certain qualities in some oils which are
not in others, so there may be certain similar or corresponding
qualities or powers in the combinations of each.  I suppose we have all
noticed some time or other that the light of colza oil is not quite the
same as that of paraffin, or that the flames of coal gas and whale oil
are different.  They find it so in the light-houses! All at once it
occurred to me that there might be some special virtue in the oil which
had been found in the jars when Queen Tera’s tomb was opened.  These
had not been used to preserve the intestines as usual, so they must
have been placed there for some other purpose.  I remembered that in
Van Huyn’s narrative he had commented on the way the jars were sealed.
This was lightly, though effectually; they could be opened without
force.  The jars were themselves preserved in a sarcophagus which,
though of immense strength and hermetically sealed, could be opened
easily.  Accordingly, I went at once to examine the jars.  A little—a
very little of the oil still remained, but it had grown thick in the
two and a half centuries in which the jars had been open.  Still, it
was not rancid; and on examining it I found it was cedar oil, and that
it still exhaled something of its original aroma. This gave me the idea
that it was to be used to fill the lamps.  Whoever had placed the oil
in the jars, and the jars in the sarcophagus, knew that there might be
shrinkage in process of time, even in vases of alabaster, and fully
allowed for it; for each of the jars would have filled the lamps half a
dozen times.  With part of the oil remaining I made some experiments,
therefore, which may give useful results.  You know, Doctor, that cedar
oil, which was much used in the preparation and ceremonials of the
Egyptian dead, has a certain refractive power which we do not find in
other oils.  For instance, we use it on the lenses of our microscopes
to give additional clearness of vision.  Last night I put some in one
of the lamps, and placed it near a translucent part of the Magic
Coffer.  The effect was very great; the glow of light within was fuller
and more intense than I could have imagined, where an electric light
similarly placed had little, if any, effect.  I should have tried
others of the seven lamps, but that my supply of oil ran out. This,
however, is on the road to rectification.  I have sent for more cedar
oil, and expect to have before long an ample supply.  Whatever may
happen from other causes, our experiment shall not, at all events, fail
from this.  We shall see!  We shall see!”

Doctor Winchester had evidently been following the logical process of
the other’s mind, for his comment was:

“I do hope that when the light is effective in opening the box, the
mechanism will not be impaired or destroyed.”

His doubt as to this gave anxious thought to some of us.




Chapter XVI

The Cavern


In the evening Mr. Trelawny took again the whole party into the study.
When we were all attention he began to unfold his plans:

“I have come to the conclusion that for the proper carrying out of what
we will call our Great Experiment we must have absolute and complete
isolation.  Isolation not merely for a day or two, but for as long as
we may require.  Here such a thing would be impossible; the needs and
habits of a great city with its ingrained possibilities of
interruption, would, or might, quite upset us.  Telegrams, registered
letters, or express messengers would alone be sufficient; but the great
army of those who want to get something would make disaster certain.
In addition, the occurrences of the last week have drawn police
attention to this house.  Even if special instructions to keep an eye
on it have not been issued from Scotland Yard or the District Station,
you may be sure that the individual policeman on his rounds will keep
it well under observation.  Besides, the servants who have discharged
themselves will before long begin to talk.  They must; for they have,
for the sake of their own characters, to give some reason for the
termination of a service which has I should say a position in the
neighbourhood.  The servants of the neighbours will begin to talk, and,
perhaps the neighbours themselves.  Then the active and intelligent
Press will, with its usual zeal for the enlightenment of the public and
its eye to increase of circulation, get hold of the matter.  When the
reporter is after us we shall not have much chance of privacy.  Even if
we were to bar ourselves in, we should not be free from interruption,
possibly from intrusion.  Either would ruin our plans, and so we must
take measures to effect a retreat, carrying all our impedimenta with
us.  For this I am prepared.  For a long time past I have foreseen such
a possibility, and have made preparation for it.  Of course, I had no
foreknowledge of what has happened; but I knew something would, or
might, happen.  For more than two years past my house in Cornwall has
been made ready to receive all the curios which are preserved here.
When Corbeck went off on his search for the lamps I had the old house
at Kyllion made ready; it is fitted with electric light all over, and
all the appliances for manufacture of the light are complete.  I had
perhaps better tell you, for none of you, not even Margaret, knows
anything of it, that the house is absolutely shut out from public
access or even from view.  It stands on a little rocky promontory
behind a steep hill, and except from the sea cannot be seen.  Of old it
was fenced in by a high stone wall, for the house which it succeeded
was built by an ancestor of mine in the days when a great house far
away from a centre had to be prepared to defend itself. Here, then, is
a place so well adapted to our needs that it might have been prepared
on purpose.  I shall explain it to you when we are all there.  This
will not be long, for already our movement is in train.  I have sent
word to Marvin to have all preparation for our transport ready.  He is
to have a special train, which is to run at night so as to avoid
notice.  Also a number of carts and stone-wagons, with sufficient men
and appliances to take all our packing-cases to Paddington.  We shall
be away before the Argus-eyed Pressman is on the watch.  We shall today
begin our packing up; and I dare say that by tomorrow night we shall be
ready.  In the outhouses I have all the packing-cases which were used
for bringing the things from Egypt, and I am satisfied that as they
were sufficient for the journey across the desert and down the Nile to
Alexandria and thence on to London, they will serve without fail
between here and Kyllion.  We four men, with Margaret to hand us such
things as we may require, will be able to get the things packed safely;
and the carrier’s men will take them to the trucks.

“Today the servants go to Kyllion, and Mrs. Grant will make such
arrangements as may be required.  She will take a stock of necessaries
with her, so that we will not attract local attention by our daily
needs; and will keep us supplied with perishable food from London.
Thanks to Margaret’s wise and generous treatment of the servants who
decided to remain, we have got a staff on which we can depend.  They
have been already cautioned to secrecy, so that we need not fear gossip
from within. Indeed, as the servants will be in London after their
preparations at Kyllion are complete, there will not be much subject
for gossip, in detail at any rate.

“As, however, we should commence the immediate work of packing at once,
we will leave over the after proceedings till later when we have
leisure.”

Accordingly we set about our work.  Under Mr. Trelawny’s guidance, and
aided by the servants, we took from the outhouses great packing-cases.
Some of these were of enormous strength, fortified by many thicknesses
of wood, and by iron bands and rods with screw-ends and nuts.  We
placed them throughout the house, each close to the object which it was
to contain.  When this preliminary work had been effected, and there
had been placed in each room and in the hall great masses of new hay,
cotton-waste and paper, the servants were sent away.  Then we set about
packing.

No one, not accustomed to packing, could have the slightest idea of
the amount of work involved in such a task as that in which in we were
engaged. For my own part I had had a vague idea that there were a large
number of Egyptian objects in Mr. Trelawny’s house; but until I came to
deal with them seriatim I had little idea of either their importance,
the size of some of them, or of their endless number. Far into the
night we worked. At times we used all the strength which we could
muster on a single object; again we worked separately, but always under
Mr. Trelawny’s immediate direction. He himself, assisted by Margaret,
kept an exact tally of each piece.

It was only when we sat down, utterly wearied, to a long-delayed supper
that we began to realised that a large part of the work was done.  Only
a few of the packing-cases, however, were closed; for a vast amount of
work still remained.  We had finished some of the cases, each of which
held only one of the great sarcophagi. The cases which held many
objects could not be closed till all had been differentiated and packed.

I slept that night without movement or without dreams; and on our
comparing notes in the morning, I found that each of the others had had
the same experience.

By dinner-time next evening the whole work was complete, and all was
ready for the carriers who were to come at midnight.  A little before
the appointed time we heard the rumble of carts; then we were shortly
invaded by an army of workmen, who seemed by sheer force of numbers to
move without effort, in an endless procession, all our prepared
packages.  A little over an hour sufficed them, and when the carts had
rumbled away, we all got ready to follow them to Paddington.  Silvio
was of course to be taken as one of our party.

Before leaving we went in a body over the house, which looked desolate
indeed.  As the servants had all gone to Cornwall there had been no
attempt at tidying-up; every room and passage in which we had worked,
and all the stairways, were strewn with paper and waste, and marked
with dirty feet.

The last thing which Mr. Trelawny did before coming away was to take
from the great safe the Ruby with the Seven Stars.  As he put it safely
into his pocket-book, Margaret, who had all at once seemed to grow
deadly tired and stood beside her father pale and rigid, suddenly
became all aglow, as though the sight of the Jewel had inspired her.
She smiled at her father approvingly as she said:

“You are right, Father.  There will not be any more trouble tonight.
She will not wreck your arrangements for any cause.  I would stake my
life upon it.”

“She—or something—wrecked us in the desert when we had come from the
tomb in the Valley of the Sorcerer!” was the grim comment of Corbeck,
who was standing by. Margaret answered him like a flash:

“Ah! she was then near her tomb from which for thousands of years her
body had not been moved.  She must know that things are different now.”

“How must she know?” asked Corbeck keenly.

“If she has that astral body that Father spoke of, surely she must
know! How can she fail to, with an invisible presence and an intellect
that can roam abroad even to the stars and the worlds beyond us!”  She
paused, and her father said solemnly:

“It is on that supposition that we are proceeding.  We must have the
courage of our convictions, and act on them—to the last!”

Margaret took his hand and held it in a dreamy kind of way as we filed
out of the house.  She was holding it still when he locked the hall
door, and when we moved up the road to the gateway, whence we took a
cab to Paddington.

When all the goods were loaded at the station, the whole of the workmen
went on to the train; this took also some of the stone-wagons used for
carrying the cases with the great sarcophagi.  Ordinary carts and
plenty of horses were to be found at Westerton, which was our station
for Kyllion.  Mr. Trelawny had ordered a sleeping-carriage for our
party; as soon as the train had started we all turned into our cubicles.

That night I slept sound.  There was over me a conviction of security
which was absolute and supreme.  Margaret’s definite announcement:
“There will not be any trouble tonight!” seemed to carry assurance with
it.  I did not question it; nor did anyone else.  It was only
afterwards that I began to think as to how she was so sure. The train
was a slow one, stopping many times and for considerable intervals.  As
Mr. Trelawny did not wish to arrive at Westerton before dark, there was
no need to hurry; and arrangements had been made to feed the workmen at
certain places on the journey.  We had our own hamper with us in the
private car.

All that afternoon we talked over the Great Experiment, which seemed to
have become a definite entity in our thoughts.  Mr. Trelawny became
more and more enthusiastic as the time wore on; hope was with him
becoming certainty.  Doctor Winchester seemed to become imbued with
some of his spirit, though at times he would throw out some scientific
fact which would either make an impasse to the other’s line of
argument, or would come as an arresting shock.  Mr. Corbeck, on the
other hand, seemed slightly antagonistic to the theory.  It may have
been that whilst the opinions of the others advanced, his own stood
still; but the effect was an attitude which appeared negative, if not
wholly one of negation.

As for Margaret, she seemed to be in some way overcome.  Either it was
some new phase of feeling with her, or else she was taking the issue
more seriously than she had yet done.  She was generally more or less
distraite, as though sunk in a brown study; from this she would recover
herself with a start.  This was usually when there occurred some marked
episode in the journey, such as stopping at a station, or when the
thunderous rumble of crossing a viaduct woke the echoes of the hills or
cliffs around us.  On each such occasion she would plunge into the
conversation, taking such a part in it as to show that, whatever had
been her abstracted thought, her senses had taken in fully all that had
gone on around her.  Towards myself her manner was strange.  Sometimes
it was marked by a distance, half shy, half haughty, which was new to
me.  At other times there were moments of passion in look and gesture
which almost made me dizzy with delight.  Little, however, of a marked
nature transpired during the journey.  There was but one episode which
had in it any element of alarm, but as we were all asleep at the time
it did not disturb us. We only learned it from a communicative guard in
the morning.  Whilst running between Dawlish and Teignmouth the train
was stopped by a warning given by someone who moved a torch to and fro
right on the very track.  The driver had found on pulling up that just
ahead of the train a small landslip had taken place, some of the red
earth from the high bank having fallen away.  It did not however reach
to the metals; and the driver had resumed his way, none too well
pleased at the delay.  To use his own words, the guard thought “there
was too much bally caution on this ‘ere line!’”

We arrived at Westerton about nine o’clock in the evening.  Carts and
horses were in waiting, and the work of unloading the train began at
once.  Our own party did not wait to see the work done, as it was in
the hands of competent people.  We took the carriage which was in
waiting, and through the darkness of the night sped on to Kyllion.

We were all impressed by the house as it appeared in the bright
moonlight.  A great grey stone mansion of the Jacobean period; vast and
spacious, standing high over the sea on the very verge of a high cliff.
When we had swept round the curve of the avenue cut through the rock,
and come out on the high plateau on which the house stood, the crash
and murmur of waves breaking against rock far below us came with an
invigorating breath of moist sea air.  We understood then in an instant
how well we were shut out from the world on that rocky shelf above the
sea.

Within the house we found all ready.  Mrs. Grant and her staff had
worked well, and all was bright and fresh and clean.  We took a brief
survey of the chief rooms and then separated to have a wash and to
change our clothes after our long journey of more than four-and-twenty
hours.

We had supper in the great dining-room on the south side, the walls of
which actually hung over the sea.  The murmur came up muffled, but it
never ceased.  As the little promontory stood well out into the sea,
the northern side of the house was open; and the due north was in no
way shut out by the great mass of rock, which, reared high above us,
shut out the rest of the world.  Far off across the bay we could see
the trembling lights of the castle, and here and there along the shore
the faint light of a fisher’s window.  For the rest the sea was a dark
blue plain with an occasional flicker of light as the gleam of
starlight fell on the slope of a swelling wave.

When supper was over we all adjourned to the room which Mr. Trelawny
had set aside as his study, his bedroom being close to it.  As we
entered, the first thing I noticed was a great safe, somewhat similar
to that which stood in his room in London.  When we were in the room
Mr. Trelawny went over to the table, and, taking out his pocket-book,
laid it on the table.  As he did so he pressed down on it with the palm
of his hand.  A strange pallor came over his face.  With fingers that
trembled he opened the book, saying as he did so:

“Its bulk does not seem the same; I hope nothing has happened!”

All three of us men crowded round close.  Margaret alone remained calm;
she stood erect and silent, and still as a statue.  She had a far-away
look in her eyes, as though she did not either know or care what was
going on around her.

With a despairing gesture Trelawny threw open the pouch of the
pocket-book wherein he had placed the Jewel of Seven Stars.  As he sank
down on the chair which stood close to him, he said in a hoarse voice:

“My God! it is gone.  Without it the Great Experiment can come to
nothing!”

His words seemed to wake Margaret from her introspective mood.  An
agonised spasm swept her face; but almost on the instant she was calm.
She almost smiled as she said:

“You may have left it in your room, Father.  Perhaps it has fallen out
of the pocket-book whilst you were changing.”  Without a word we all
hurried into the next room through the open door between the study and
the bedroom.  And then a sudden calm fell on us like a cloud of fear.

There! on the table, lay the Jewel of Seven Stars, shining and
sparkling with lurid light, as though each of the seven points of each
the seven stars gleamed through blood!

Timidly we each looked behind us, and then at each other.  Margaret was
now like the rest of us.  She had lost her statuesque calm.  All the
introspective rigidity had gone from her; and she clasped her hands
together till the knuckles were white.

Without a word Mr. Trelawny raised the Jewel, and hurried with it into
the next room.  As quietly as he could he opened the door of the safe
with the key fastened to his wrist and placed the Jewel within.  When
the heavy doors were closed and locked he seemed to breathe more freely.

Somehow this episode, though a disturbing one in many ways, seemed to
bring us back to our old selves.  Since we had left London we had all
been overstrained; and this was a sort of relief.  Another step in our
strange enterprise had been effected.

The change back was more marked in Margaret than in any of us.  Perhaps
it was that she was a woman, whilst we were men; perhaps it was that
she was younger than the rest; perhaps both reasons were effective,
each in its own way.  At any rate the change was there, and I was
happier than I had been through the long journey.  All her buoyancy,
her tenderness, her deep feeling seemed to shine forth once more; now
and again as her father’s eyes rested on her, his face seemed to light
up.

Whilst we waited for the carts to arrive, Mr. Trelawny took us through
the house, pointing out and explaining where the objects which we had
brought with us were to be placed.  In one respect only did he withhold
confidence.  The positions of all those things which had connection
with the Great Experiment were not indicated. The cases containing them
were to be left in the outer hall, for the present.

By the time we had made the survey, the carts began to arrive; and the
stir and bustle of the previous night were renewed.  Mr. Trelawny stood
in the hall beside the massive ironbound door, and gave directions as
to the placing of each of the great packing-cases.  Those containing
many items were placed in the inner hall where they were to be unpacked.

In an incredibly short time the whole consignment was delivered; and
the men departed with a douceur for each, given through their foreman,
which made them effusive in their thanks.  Then we all went to our own
rooms.  There was a strange confidence over us all.  I do not think
that any one of us had a doubt as the quiet passing of the
remainder of the night.

The faith was justified, for on our re-assembling in the morning we
found that all had slept well and peaceably.

During that day all the curios, except those required for the Great
Experiment, were put into the places designed for them.  Then it was
arranged that all the servants should go back with Mrs. Grant to London
on the next morning.

When they had all gone Mr. Trelawny, having seen the doors locked, took
us into the study.

“Now,” said he when we were seated, “I have a secret to impart; but,
according to an old promise which does not leave me free, I must ask
you each to give me a solemn promise not to reveal it.  For three
hundred years at least such a promise has been exacted from everyone to
whom it was told, and more than once life and safety were secured
through loyal observance of the promise.  Even as it is, I am breaking
the letter, if not the spirit of the tradition; for I should only tell
it to the immediate members of my family.”

We all gave the promise required.  Then he went on:

“There is a secret place in this house, a cave, natural originally but
finished by labour, underneath this house.  I will not undertake to say
that it has always been used according to the law.  During the Bloody
Assize more than a few Cornishmen found refuge in it; and later, and
earlier, it formed, I have no doubt whatever, a useful place for
storing contraband goods.  ‘Tre Pol and Pen’, I suppose you know, have
always been smugglers; and their relations and friends and neighbours
have not held back from the enterprise.  For all such reasons a safe
hiding-place was always considered a valuable possession; and as the
heads of our House have always insisted on preserving the secret, I am
in honour bound to it.  Later on, if all be well, I shall of course
tell you, Margaret, and you too, Ross, under the conditions that I am
bound to make.”

He rose up, and we all followed him.  Leaving us in the outer hall, he
went away alone for a few minutes; and returning, beckoned us to follow
him.

In the inside hall we found a whole section of an outstanding angle
moved away, and from the cavity saw a great hole dimly dark, and the
beginning of a rough staircase cut in the rock. As it was not pitch
dark there was manifestly some means of lighting it naturally, so
without pause we followed our host as he descended. After some forty
or fifty steps cut in a winding passage, we came to a great cave whose
further end tapered away into blackness. It was a huge place, dimly
lit by a few irregular slits of eccentric shape. Manifestly these
were faults in the rock which would readily allow the windows to be
disguised. Close to each of them was a hanging shutter which could
be easily swung across by means of a dangling rope. The sound of
the ceaseless beat of the waves came up muffled from far below. Mr.
Trelawny at once began to speak:

“This is the spot which I have chosen, as the best I know, for the
scene of our Great Experiment.  In a hundred different ways it fulfils
the conditions which I am led to believe are primary with regard to
success. Here, we are, and shall be, as isolated as Queen Tera herself
would have been in her rocky tomb in the Valley of the Sorcerer, and
still in a rocky cavern.  For good or ill we must here stand by our
chances, and abide by results.  If we are successful we shall be able
to let in on the world of modern science such a flood of light from the
Old World as will change every condition of thought and experiment and
practice.  If we fail, then even the knowledge of our attempt will die
with us.  For this, and all else which may come, I believe we are
prepared!”  He paused.  No one spoke, but we all bowed our heads
gravely in acquiescence.  He resumed, but with a certain hesitancy:

“It is not yet too late!  If any of you have a doubt or misgiving, for
God’s sake speak it now!  Whoever it may be, can go hence without let or
hindrance.  The rest of us can go on our way alone!”

Again he paused, and looked keenly at us in turn.  We looked at each
other; but no one quailed.  For my own part, if I had had any doubt as
to going on, the look on Margaret’s face would have reassured me.  It
was fearless; it was intense; it was full of a divine calm.

Mr. Trelawny took a long breath, and in a more cheerful, as well as in
a more decided tone, went on:

“As we are all of one mind, the sooner we get the necessary matters in
train the better.  Let me tell you that this place, like all the rest
of the house, can be lit with electricity.  We could not join the wires
to the mains lest our secret should become known, but I have a cable
here which we can attach in the hall and complete the circuit!”  As he
was speaking, he began to ascend the steps.  From close to the entrance
he took the end of a cable; this he drew forward and attached to a
switch in the wall.  Then, turning on a tap, he flooded the whole vault
and staircase below with light.  I could now see from the volume of
light streaming up into the hallway that the hole beside the staircase
went direct into the cave.  Above it was a pulley and a mass of strong
tackle with multiplying blocks of the Smeaton order.  Mr. Trelawny,
seeing me looking at this, said, correctly interpreting my thoughts:

“Yes! it is new.  I hung it there myself on purpose.  I knew we should
have to lower great weights; and as I did not wish to take too many
into my confidence, I arranged a tackle which I could work alone if
necessary.”

We set to work at once; and before nightfall had lowered, unhooked, and
placed in the positions designated for each by Trelawny, all the great
sarcophagi and all the curios and other matters which we had taken with
us.

It was a strange and weird proceeding, the placing of those wonderful
monuments of a bygone age in that green cavern, which represented in
its cutting and purpose and up-to-date mechanism and electric lights
both the old world and the new.  But as time went on I grew more and
more to recognise the wisdom and correctness of Mr. Trelawny’s choice.
I was much disturbed when Silvio, who had been brought into the cave in
the arms of his mistress, and who was lying asleep on my coat which I
had taken off, sprang up when the cat mummy had been unpacked, and flew
at it with the same ferocity which he had previously exhibited.  The
incident showed Margaret in a new phase, and one which gave my heart a
pang.  She had been standing quite still at one side of the cave
leaning on a sarcophagus, in one of those fits of abstraction which had
of late come upon her; but on hearing the sound, and seeing Silvio’s
violent onslaught, she seemed to fall into a positive fury of passion.
Her eyes blazed, and her mouth took a hard, cruel tension which was new
to me. Instinctively she stepped towards Silvio as if to interfere in
the attack.  But I too had stepped forward; and as she caught my eye a
strange spasm came upon her, and she stopped.  Its intensity made me
hold my breath; and I put up my hand to clear my eyes.  When I had done
this, she had on the instant recovered her calm, and there was a look
of brief wonder on her face.  With all her old grace and sweetness she
swept over and lifted Silvio, just as she had done on former occasions,
and held him in her arms, petting him and treating him as though he
were a little child who had erred.

As I looked a strange fear came over me.  The Margaret that I knew
seemed to be changing; and in my inmost heart I prayed that the
disturbing cause might soon come to an end.  More than ever I longed at
that moment that our terrible Experiment should come to a prosperous
termination.

When all had been arranged in the room as Mr. Trelawny wished he turned
to us, one after another, till he had concentrated the intelligence of
us all upon him.  Then he said:

“All is now ready in this place.  We must only await the proper time to
begin.”

We were silent for a while.  Doctor Winchester was the first to speak:

“What is the proper time?  Have you any approximation, even if you are
not satisfied as to the exact day?”  He answered at once:

“After the most anxious thought I have fixed on July 31!”

“May I ask why that date?”  He spoke his answer slowly:

“Queen Tera was ruled in great degree by mysticism, and there are so
many evidences that she looked for resurrection that naturally she
would choose a period ruled over by a God specialised to such a
purpose.  Now, the fourth month of the season of Inundation was ruled
by Harmachis, this being the name for ‘Ra’, the Sun-God, at his rising
in the morning, and therefore typifying the awakening or arising.  This
arising is manifestly to physical life, since it is of the mid-world of
human daily life.  Now as this month begins on our 25th July, the
seventh day would be July 31st, for you may be sure that the mystic
Queen would not have chosen any day but the seventh or some power of
seven.

“I dare say that some of you have wondered why our preparations have
been so deliberately undertaken.  This is why!  We must be ready in
every possible way when the time comes; but there was no use in having
to wait round for a needless number of days.”

And so we waited only for the 31st of July, the next day but one, when
the Great Experiment would be made.




Chapter XVII

Doubts and Fears


We learn of great things by little experiences.  The history of ages is
but an indefinite repetition of the history of hours.  The record of a
soul is but a multiple of the story of a moment.  The Recording Angel
writes in the Great Book in no rainbow tints; his pen is dipped in no
colours but light and darkness.  For the eye of infinite wisdom there
is no need of shading.  All things, all thoughts, all emotions, all
experiences, all doubts and hopes and fears, all intentions, all wishes
seen down to the lower strata of their concrete and multitudinous
elements, are finally resolved into direct opposites.

Did any human being wish for the epitome of a life wherein were
gathered and grouped all the experiences that a child of Adam could
have, the history, fully and frankly written, of my own mind during the
next forty-eight hours would afford him all that could be wanted.  And
the Recorder could have wrought as usual in sunlight and shadow, which
may be taken to represent the final expressions of Heaven and Hell.
For in the highest Heaven is Faith; and Doubt hangs over the yawning
blackness of Hell.

There were of course times of sunshine in those two days; moments when,
in the realisation of Margaret’s sweetness and her love for me, all
doubts were dissipated like morning mist before the sun.  But the
balance of the time—and an overwhelming balance it was—gloom hung
over me like a pall.  The hour, in whose coming I had acquiesced, was
approaching so quickly and was already so near that the sense of
finality was bearing upon me!  The issue was perhaps life or death to
any of us; but for this we were all prepared.  Margaret and I were one
as to the risk.  The question of the moral aspect of the case, which
involved the religious belief in which I had been reared, was not one
to trouble me; for the issues, and the causes that lay behind them,
were not within my power even to comprehend.  The doubt of the success
of the Great Experiment was such a doubt as exists in all enterprises
which have great possibilities.  To me, whose life was passed in a
series of intellectual struggles, this form of doubt was a stimulus,
rather than deterrent.  What then was it that made for me a trouble,
which became an anguish when my thoughts dwelt long on it?

I was beginning to doubt Margaret!

What it was that I doubted I knew not.  It was not her love, or her
honour, or her truth, or her kindness, or her zeal.  What then was it?

It was herself!

Margaret was changing!  At times during the past few days I had hardly
known her as the same girl whom I had met at the picnic, and whose
vigils I had shared in the sick-room of her father.  Then, even in her
moments of greatest sorrow or fright or anxiety, she was all life and
thought and keenness.  Now she was generally distraite, and at times in
a sort of negative condition as though her mind—her very being—was
not present.  At such moments she would have full possession of
observation and memory.  She would know and remember all that was going
on, and had gone on around her; but her coming back to her old self had
to me something the sensation of a new person coming into the room.  Up
to the time of leaving London I had been content whenever she was
present.  I had over me that delicious sense of security which comes
with the consciousness that love is mutual.  But now doubt had taken
its place. I never knew whether the personality present was my
Margaret—the old Margaret whom I had loved at the first glance—or the
other new Margaret, whom I hardly understood, and whose intellectual
aloofness made an impalpable barrier between us.  Sometimes she would
become, as it were, awake all at once. At such times, though she would
say to me sweet and pleasant things which she had often said before,
she would seem most unlike herself.  It was almost as if she was
speaking parrot-like or at dictation of one who could read words or
acts, but not thoughts.  After one or two experiences of this kind, my
own doubting began to make a barrier; for I could not speak with the
ease and freedom which were usual to me.  And so hour by hour we
drifted apart.  Were it not for the few odd moments when the old
Margaret was back with me full of her charm I do not know what would
have happened.  As it was, each such moment gave me a fresh start and
kept my love from changing.

I would have given the world for a confidant; but this was impossible.
How could I speak a doubt of Margaret to anyone, even her father!  How
could I speak a doubt to Margaret, when Margaret herself was the theme!
I could only endure—and hope. And of the two the endurance was the
lesser pain.

I think that Margaret must have at times felt that there was some cloud
between us, for towards the end of the first day she began to shun me a
little; or perhaps it was that she had become more diffident that usual
about me.  Hitherto she had sought every opportunity of being with me,
just as I had tried to be with her; so that now any avoidance, one of
the other, made a new pain to us both.

On this day the household seemed very still.  Each one of us was about
his own work, or occupied with his own thoughts.  We only met at meal
times; and then, though we talked, all seemed more or less preoccupied.
There was not in the house even the stir of the routine of service.
The precaution of Mr. Trelawny in having three rooms prepared for each
of us had rendered servants unnecessary.  The dining-room was solidly
prepared with cooked provisions for several days.  Towards evening I
went out by myself for a stroll.  I had looked for Margaret to ask her
to come with me; but when I found her, she was in one of her apathetic
moods, and the charm of her presence seemed lost to me.  Angry with
myself, but unable to quell my own spirit of discontent, I went out
alone over the rocky headland.

On the cliff, with the wide expanse of wonderful sea before me, and no
sound but the dash of waves below and the harsh screams of the seagulls
above, my thoughts ran free.  Do what I would, they returned
continuously to one subject, the solving of the doubt that was upon me.
Here in the solitude, amid the wide circle of Nature’s force and
strife, my mind began to work truly.  Unconsciously I found myself
asking a question which I would not allow myself to answer.  At last
the persistence of a mind working truly prevailed; I found myself face
to face with my doubt.  The habit of my life began to assert itself,
and I analysed the evidence before me.

It was so startling that I had to force myself into obedience to
logical effort.  My starting-place was this:  Margaret was changed—in
what way, and by what means? Was it her character, or her mind, or her
nature? for her physical appearance remained the same.  I began to
group all that I had ever heard of her, beginning at her birth.

It was strange at the very first.  She had been, according to Corbeck’s
statement, born of a dead mother during the time that her father and
his friend were in a trance in the tomb at Aswan.  That trance was
presumably effected by a woman; a woman mummied, yet preserving as we
had every reason to believe from after experience, an astral body
subject to a free will and an active intelligence.  With that astral
body, space ceased to exist.  The vast distance between London and
Aswan became as naught; and whatever power of necromancy the Sorceress
had might have been exercised over the dead mother, and possibly the
dead child.

The dead child!  Was it possible that the child was dead and was made
alive again? Whence then came the animating spirit—the soul?  Logic
was pointing the way to me now with a vengeance!

If the Egyptian belief was true for Egyptians, then the “Ka” of the
dead Queen and her “Khu” could animate what she might choose.  In such
case Margaret would not be an individual at all, but simply a phase of
Queen Tera herself; an astral body obedient to her will!

Here I revolted against logic.  Every fibre of my being resented such a
conclusion. How could I believe that there was no Margaret at all; but
just an animated image, used by the Double of a woman of forty
centuries ago to its own ends...! Somehow, the outlook was brighter to
me now, despite the new doubts.

At least I had Margaret!

Back swung the logical pendulum again.  The child then was not dead.
If so, had the Sorceress had anything to do with her birth at all?  It
was evident—so I took it again from Corbeck—that there was a strange
likeness between Margaret and the pictures of Queen Tera.  How could
this be?  It could not be any birth-mark reproducing what had been in
the mother’s mind; for Mrs. Trelawny had never seen the pictures.  Nay,
even her father had not seen them till he had found his way into the
tomb only a few days before her birth.  This phase I could not get rid
of so easily as the last; the fibres of my being remained quiet.  There
remained to me the horror of doubt.  And even then, so strange is the
mind of man, Doubt itself took a concrete image; a vast and
impenetrable gloom, through which flickered irregularly and
spasmodically tiny points of evanescent light, which seemed to quicken
the darkness into a positive existence.

The remaining possibility of relations between Margaret and the mummied
Queen was, that in some occult way the Sorceress had power to change
places with the other.  This view of things could not be so lightly
thrown aside.  There were too many suspicious circumstances to warrant
this, now that my attention was fixed on it and my intelligence
recognised the possibility.  Hereupon there began to come into my mind
all the strange incomprehensible matters which had whirled through our
lives in the last few days.  At first they all crowded in upon me in a
jumbled mass; but again the habit of mind of my working life prevailed,
and they took order.  I found it now easier to control myself; for
there was something to grasp, some work to be done; though it was of a
sorry kind, for it was or might be antagonistic to Margaret.  But
Margaret was herself at stake!  I was thinking of her and fighting for
her; and yet if I were to work in the dark, I might be even harmful to
her.  My first weapon in her defence was truth.  I must know and
understand; I might then be able to act.  Certainly, I could not act
beneficently without a just conception and recognition of the facts.
Arranged in order these were as follows:

Firstly:  the strange likeness of Queen Tera to Margaret who had been
born in another country a thousand miles away, where her mother could
not possibly have had even a passing knowledge of her appearance.

Secondly:  the disappearance of Van Huyn’s book when I had read up to
the description of the Star Ruby.

Thirdly:  the finding of the lamps in the boudoir.  Tera with her
astral body could have unlocked the door of Corbeck’s room in the
hotel, and have locked it again after her exit with the lamps.  She
could in the same way have opened the window, and put the lamps in the
boudoir.  It need not have been that Margaret in her own person should
have had any hand in this; but—but it was at least strange.

Fourthly:  here the suspicions of the Detective and the Doctor came
back to me with renewed force, and with a larger understanding.

Fifthly:  there were the occasions on which Margaret foretold with
accuracy the coming occasions of quietude, as though she had some
conviction or knowledge of the intentions of the astral-bodied Queen.

Sixthly:  there was her suggestion of the finding of the Ruby which her
father had lost.  As I thought now afresh over this episode in the
light of suspicion in which her own powers were involved, the only
conclusion I could come to was—always supposing that the theory of the
Queen’s astral power was correct—that Queen Tera being anxious that
all should go well in the movement from London to Kyllion had in her
own way taken the Jewel from Mr. Trelawny’s pocket-book, finding it of
some use in her supernatural guardianship of the journey.  Then in some
mysterious way she had, through Margaret, made the suggestion of its
loss and finding.

Seventhly, and lastly, was the strange dual existence which Margaret
seemed of late to be leading; and which in some way seemed a
consequence or corollary of all that had gone before.

The dual existence!  This was indeed the conclusion which overcame all
difficulties and reconciled opposites.  If indeed Margaret were not in
all ways a free agent, but could be compelled to speak or act as she
might be instructed; or if her whole being could be changed for another
without the possibility of any one noticing the doing of it, then all
things were possible.  All would depend on the spirit of the
individuality by which she could be so compelled.  If this
individuality were just and kind and clean, all might be well.  But if
not! ... The thought was too awful for words.  I ground my teeth with
futile rage, as the ideas of horrible possibilities swept through me.

Up to this morning Margaret’s lapses into her new self had been few and
hardly noticeable, save when once or twice her attitude towards myself
had been marked by a bearing strange to me.  But today the contrary was
the case; and the change presaged badly.  It might be that that other
individuality was of the lower, not of the better sort!  Now that I
thought of it I had reason to fear.  In the history of the mummy, from
the time of Van Huyn’s breaking into the tomb, the record of deaths
that we knew of, presumably effected by her will and agency, was a
startling one. The Arab who had stolen the hand from the mummy; and the
one who had taken it from his body.  The Arab chief who had tried to
steal the Jewel from Van Huyn, and whose throat bore the marks of seven
fingers. The two men found dead on the first night of Trelawny’s taking
away the sarcophagus; and the three on the return to the tomb.  The
Arab who had opened the secret serdab.  Nine dead men, one of them
slain manifestly by the Queen’s own hand!  And beyond this again the
several savage attacks on Mr. Trelawny in his own room, in which, aided
by her Familiar, she had tried to open the safe and to extract the
Talisman jewel.  His device of fastening the key to his wrist by a
steel bangle, though successful in the end, had wellnigh cost him his
life.

If then the Queen, intent on her resurrection under her own conditions
had, so to speak, waded to it through blood, what might she not do were
her purpose thwarted?  What terrible step might she not take to effect
her wishes?  Nay, what were her wishes; what was her ultimate purpose?
As yet we had had only Margaret’s statement of them, given in all the
glorious enthusiasm of her lofty soul.  In her record there was no
expression of love to be sought or found.  All we knew for certain was
that she had set before her the object of resurrection, and that in it
the North which she had manifestly loved was to have a special part.
But that the resurrection was to be accomplished in the lonely tomb in
the Valley of the Sorcerer was apparent.  All preparations had been
carefully made for accomplishment from within, and for her ultimate
exit in her new and living form. The sarcophagus was unlidded.  The oil
jars, though hermetically sealed, were to be easily opened by hand; and
in them provision was made for shrinkage through a vast period of time.
Even flint and steel were provided for the production of flame.  The
Mummy Pit was left open in violation of usage; and beside the stone
door on the cliff side was fixed an imperishable chain by which she
might in safety descend to earth. But as to what her after intentions
were we had no clue.  If it was that she meant to begin life again as a
humble individual, there was something so noble in the thought that it
even warmed my heart to her and turned my wishes to her success.

The very idea seemed to endorse Margaret’s magnificent tribute to her
purpose, and helped to calm my troubled spirit.

Then and there, with this feeling strong upon me, I determined to warn
Margaret and her father of dire possibilities; and to await, as well
content as I could in my ignorance, the development of things over
which I had no power.

I returned to the house in a different frame of mind to that in
which I had left it; and was enchanted to find Margaret—the old
Margaret—waiting for me.

After dinner, when I was alone for a time with the father and daughter,
I opened the subject, though with considerable hesitation:

“Would it not be well to take every possible precaution, in case the
Queen may not wish what we are doing, with regard to what may occur
before the Experiment; and at or after her waking, if it comes off?”
Margaret’s answer came back quickly; so quickly that I was convinced
she must have had it ready for some one:

“But she does approve!  Surely it cannot be otherwise.  Father is
doing, with all his brains and all his energy and all his great
courage, just exactly what the great Queen had arranged!”

“But,” I answered, “that can hardly be.  All that she arranged was in a
tomb high up in a rock, in a desert solitude, shut away from the world
by every conceivable means. She seems to have depended on this
isolation to insure against accident.  Surely, here in another country
and age, with quite different conditions, she may in her anxiety make
mistakes and treat any of you—of us—as she did those others in times
gone past. Nine men that we know of have been slain by her own hand or
by her instigation.  She can be remorseless if she will.”  It did not
strike me till afterwards when I was thinking over this conversation,
how thoroughly I had accepted the living and conscious condition of
Queen Tera as a fact.  Before I spoke, I had feared I might offend Mr.
Trelawny; but to my pleasant surprise he smiled quite genially as he
answered me:

“My dear fellow, in a way you are quite right.  The Queen did
undoubtedly intend isolation; and, all told, it would be best that her
experiment should be made as she arranged it.  But just think, that
became impossible when once the Dutch explorer had broken into her
tomb. That was not my doing.  I am innocent of it, though it was the
cause of my setting out to rediscover the sepulchre.  Mind, I do not
say for a moment that I would not have done just the same as Van Huyn.
I went into the tomb from curiosity; and I took away what I did, being
fired with the zeal of acquisitiveness which animates the collector.
But, remember also, that at this time I did not know of the Queen’s
intention of resurrection; I had no idea of the completeness of her
preparations. All that came long afterwards.  But when it did come, I
have done all that I could to carry out her wishes to the full.  My
only fear is that I may have misinterpreted some of her cryptic
instructions, or have omitted or overlooked something.  But of this I
am certain; I have left undone nothing that I can imagine right to be
done; and I have done nothing that I know of to clash with Queen Tera’s
arrangement.  I want her Great Experiment to succeed.  To this end I
have not spared labour or time or money—or myself.  I have endured
hardship, and braved danger. All my brains; all my knowledge and
learning, such as they are; all my endeavours such as they can be, have
been, are, and shall be devoted to this end, till we either win or lose
the great stake that we play for.”

“The great stake?” I repeated; “the resurrection of the woman, and the
woman’s life? The proof that resurrection can be accomplished; by
magical powers; by scientific knowledge; or by use of some force which
at present the world does not know?”

Then Mr. Trelawny spoke out the hopes of his heart which up to now he
had indicated rather than expressed.  Once or twice I had heard Corbeck
speak of the fiery energy of his youth; but, save for the noble words
of Margaret when she had spoken of Queen Tera’s hope—which coming from
his daughter made possible a belief that her power was in some sense
due to heredity—I had seen no marked sign of it.  But now his words,
sweeping before them like a torrent all antagonistic thought, gave me a
new idea of the man.

“‘A woman’s life!’  What is a woman’s life in the scale with what we
hope for!  Why, we are risking already a woman’s life; the dearest life
to me in all the world, and that grows more dear with every hour that
passes.  We are risking as well the lives of four men; yours and my
own, as well as those two others who have been won to our confidence.
‘The proof that resurrection can be accomplished!’  That is much.  A
marvellous thing in this age of science, and the scepticism that
knowledge makes. But life and resurrection are themselves but items in
what may be won by the accomplishment of this Great Experiment.
Imagine what it will be for the world of thought—the true world of
human progress—the veritable road to the Stars, the itur ad astra of
the Ancients—if there can come back to us out of the unknown past one
who can yield to us the lore stored in the great Library of Alexandria,
and lost in its consuming flames.  Not only history can be set right,
and the teachings of science made veritable from their beginnings; but
we can be placed on the road to the knowledge of lost arts, lost
learning, lost sciences, so that our feet may tread on the indicated
path to their ultimate and complete restoration.  Why, this woman can
tell us what the world was like before what is called ‘the Flood’; can
give us the origin of that vast astounding myth; can set the mind back
to the consideration of things which to us now seem primeval, but which
were old stories before the days of the Patriarchs.  But this is not
the end!  No, not even the beginning!  If the story of this woman be
all that we think—which some of us most firmly believe; if her powers
and the restoration of them prove to be what we expect, why, then we
may yet achieve a knowledge beyond what our age has ever known—beyond
what is believed today possible for the children of men.  If indeed
this resurrection can be accomplished, how can we doubt the old
knowledge, the old magic, the old belief! And if this be so, we must
take it that the ‘Ka’ of this great and learned Queen has won secrets
of more than mortal worth from her surroundings amongst the stars. This
woman in her life voluntarily went down living to the grave, and came
back again, as we learn from the records in her tomb; she chose to die
her mortal death whilst young, so that at her resurrection in another
age, beyond a trance of countless magnitude, she might emerge from her
tomb in all the fulness and splendour of her youth and power.  Already
we have evidence that though her body slept in patience through those
many centuries, her intelligence never passed away, that her resolution
never flagged, that her will remained supreme; and, most important of
all, that her memory was unimpaired.  Oh, what possibilities are there
in the coming of such a being into our midst!  One whose history began
before the concrete teaching of our Bible; whose experiences were
antecedent to the formulation of the Gods of Greece; who can link
together the Old and the New, Earth and Heaven, and yield to the known
worlds of thought and physical existence the mystery of the Unknown—of
the Old World in its youth, and of Worlds beyond our ken!”

He paused, almost overcome.  Margaret had taken his hand when he spoke
of her being so dear to him, and held it hard.  As he spoke she
continued to hold it.  But there came over her face that change which I
had so often seen of late; that mysterious veiling of her own
personality which gave me the subtle sense of separation from her.  In
his impassioned vehemence her father did not notice; but when he
stopped she seemed all at once to be herself again.  In her glorious
eyes came the added brightness of unshed tears; and with a gesture of
passionate love and admiration, she stooped and kissed her father’s
hand.  Then, turning to me, she too spoke:

“Malcolm, you have spoken of the deaths that came from the poor Queen;
or rather that justly came from meddling with her arrangements and
thwarting her purpose. Do you not think that, in putting it as you have
done, you have been unjust?  Who would not have done just as she did?
Remember she was fighting for her life!  Ay, and for more than her
life! For life, and love, and all the glorious possibilities of that
dim future in the unknown world of the North which had such enchanting
hopes for her!  Do you not think that she, with all the learning of her
time, and with all the great and resistless force of her mighty nature,
had hopes of spreading in a wider way the lofty aspirations of her
soul! That she hoped to bring to the conquering of unknown worlds, and
using to the advantage of her people, all that she had won from sleep
and death and time; all of which might and could have been frustrated
by the ruthless hand of an assassin or a thief.  Were it you, in such
case would you not struggle by all means to achieve the object of your
life and hope; whose possibilities grew and grew in the passing of
those endless years?  Can you think that that active brain was at rest
during all those weary centuries, whilst her free soul was flitting
from world to world amongst the boundless regions of the stars? Had
these stars in their myriad and varied life no lessons for her; as they
have had for us since we followed the glorious path which she and her
people marked for us, when they sent their winged imaginations circling
amongst the lamps of the night!”

Here she paused.  She too was overcome, and the welling tears ran down
her cheeks. I was myself more moved than I can say.  This was indeed my
Margaret; and in the consciousness of her presence my heart leapt.  Out
of my happiness came boldness, and I dared to say now what I had feared
would be impossible:  something which would call the attention of Mr.
Trelawny to what I imagined was the dual existence of his daughter.  As
I took Margaret’s hand in mine and kissed it, I said to her father:

“Why, sir! she couldn’t speak more eloquently if the very spirit of
Queen Tera was with her to animate her and suggest thoughts!”

Mr. Trelawny’s answer simply overwhelmed me with surprise.  It
manifested to me that he too had gone through just such a process of
thought as my own.

“And what if it was; if it is!  I know well that the spirit of her
mother is within her.  If in addition there be the spirit of that great
and wondrous Queen, then she would be no less dear to me, but doubly
dear!  Do not have fear for her, Malcolm Ross; at least have no more
fear than you may have for the rest of us!”  Margaret took up the
theme, speaking so quickly that her words seemed a continuation of her
father’s, rather than an interruption of them.

“Have no special fear for me, Malcolm.  Queen Tera knows, and will
offer us no harm. I know it!  I know it, as surely as I am lost in the
depth of my own love for you!”

There was something in her voice so strange to me that I looked quickly
into her eyes.  They were bright as ever, but veiled to my seeing the
inward thought behind them as are the eyes of a caged lion.

Then the two other men came in, and the subject changed.




Chapter XVIII

The Lesson of the “Ka”


That night we all went to bed early.  The next night would be an
anxious one, and Mr. Trelawny thought that we should all be fortified
with what sleep we could get. The day, too, would be full of work.
Everything in connection with the Great Experiment would have to be
gone over, so that at the last we might not fail from any unthought-of
flaw in our working. We made, of course, arrangements for summoning aid
in case such should be needed; but I do not think that any of us had
any real apprehension of danger.  Certainly we had no fear of such
danger from violence as we had had to guard against in London during
Mr. Trelawny’s long trance.

For my own part I felt a strange sense of relief in the matter.  I had
accepted Mr. Trelawny’s reasoning that if the Queen were indeed such as
we surmised—such as indeed we now took for granted—there would not be
any opposition on her part; for we were carrying out her own wishes to
the very last.  So far I was at ease—far more at ease than earlier in
the day I should have thought possible; but there were other sources of
trouble which I could not blot out from my mind.  Chief amongst them
was Margaret’s strange condition.  If it was indeed that she had in her
own person a dual existence, what might happen when the two existences
became one? Again, and again, and again I turned this matter over in my
mind, till I could have shrieked out in nervous anxiety.  It was no
consolation to me to remember that Margaret was herself satisfied, and
her father acquiescent.  Love is, after all, a selfish thing; and it
throws a black shadow on anything between which and the light it
stands. I seemed to hear the hands go round the dial of the clock; I
saw darkness turn to gloom, and gloom to grey, and grey to light
without pause or hindrance to the succession of my miserable feelings.
At last, when it was decently possible without the fear of disturbing
others, I got up.  I crept along the passage to find if all was well
with the others; for we had arranged that the door of each of our rooms
should be left slightly open so that any sound of disturbance would be
easily and distinctly heard.

One and all slept; I could hear the regular breathing of each, and my
heart rejoiced that this miserable night of anxiety was safely passed.
As I knelt in my own room in a burst of thankful prayer, I knew in the
depths of my own heart the measure of my fear.  I found my way out of
the house, and went down to the water by the long stairway cut in the
rock.  A swim in the cool bright sea braced my nerves and made me my
old self again.

As I came back to the top of the steps I could see the bright sunlight,
rising from behind me, turning the rocks across the bay to glittering
gold.  And yet I felt somehow disturbed.  It was all too bright; as it
sometimes is before the coming of a storm.  As I paused to watch it, I
felt a soft hand on my shoulder; and, turning, found Margaret close to
me; Margaret as bright and radiant as the morning glory of the sun! It
was my own Margaret this time!  My old Margaret, without alloy of any
other; and I felt that, at least, this last and fatal day was well
begun.

But alas! the joy did not last.  When we got back to the house from a
stroll around the cliffs, the same old routine of yesterday was
resumed: gloom and anxiety, hope, high spirits, deep depression, and
apathetic aloofness.

But it was to be a day of work; and we all braced ourselves to it with
an energy which wrought its own salvation.

After breakfast we all adjourned to the cave, where Mr. Trelawny went
over, point by point, the position of each item of our paraphernalia.
He explained as he went on why each piece was so placed.  He had with
him the great rolls of paper with the measured plans and the signs and
drawings which he had had made from his own and Corbeck’s rough notes.
As he had told us, these contained the whole of the hieroglyphics on
walls and ceilings and floor of the tomb in the Valley of the Sorcerer.
Even had not the measurements, made to scale, recorded the position of
each piece of furniture, we could have eventually placed them by a
study of the cryptic writings and symbols.

Mr. Trelawny explained to us certain other things, not laid down on the
chart.  Such as, for instance, that the hollowed part of the table was
exactly fitted to the bottom of the Magic Coffer, which was therefore
intended to be placed on it.  The respective legs of this table were
indicated by differently shaped uraei outlined on the floor, the head
of each being extended in the direction of the similar uraeus twined
round the leg. Also that the mummy, when laid on the raised portion in
the bottom of the sarcophagus, seemingly made to fit the form, would
lie head to the West and feet to the East, thus receiving the natural
earth currents.  “If this be intended,” he said, “as I presume it is, I
gather that the force to be used has something to do with magnetism or
electricity, or both.  It may be, of course, that some other force,
such, for instance, as that emanating from radium, is to be employed.
I have experimented with the latter, but only in such small quantity as
I could obtain; but so far as I can ascertain the stone of the Coffer
is absolutely impervious to its influence.  There must be some such
unsusceptible substances in nature.  Radium does not seemingly manifest
itself when distributed through pitchblende; and there are doubtless
other such substances in which it can be imprisoned.  Possibly these
may belong to that class of “inert” elements discovered or isolated by
Sir William Ramsay.  It is therefore possible that in this Coffer, made
from an aerolite and therefore perhaps containing some element unknown
in our world, may be imprisoned some mighty power which is to be
released on its opening.”

This appeared to be an end of this branch of the subject; but as he
still kept the fixed look of one who is engaged in a theme we all
waited in silence.  After a pause he went on:

“There is one thing which has up to now, I confess, puzzled me.  It may
not be of prime importance; but in a matter like this, where all is
unknown, we must take it that everything is important.  I cannot think
that in a matter worked out with such extraordinary scrupulosity such a
thing should be overlooked.  As you may see by the ground-plan of the
tomb the sarcophagus stands near the north wall, with the Magic Coffer
to the south of it.  The space covered by the former is left quite bare
of symbol or ornamentation of any kind.  At the first glance this would
seem to imply that the drawings had been made after the sarcophagus had
been put into its place.  But a more minute examination will show that
the symbolisation on the floor is so arranged that a definite effect is
produced.  See, here the writings run in correct order as though they
had jumped across the gap.  It is only from certain effects that it
becomes clear that there is a meaning of some kind.  What that meaning
may be is what we want to know.  Look at the top and bottom of the
vacant space, which lies West and East corresponding to the head and
foot of the sarcophagus.  In both are duplications of the same
symbolisation, but so arranged that the parts of each one of them are
integral portions of some other writing running crosswise.  It is only
when we get a coup d’oeil from either the head or the foot that you
recognise that there are symbolisations.  See! they are in triplicate
at the corners and the centre of both top and bottom.  In every case
there is a sun cut in half by the line of the sarcophagus, as by the
horizon. Close behind each of these and faced away from it, as though
in some way dependent on it, is the vase which in hieroglyphic writing
symbolises the heart—‘Ab’ the Egyptians called it.  Beyond each of
these again is the figure of a pair of widespread arms turned upwards
from the elbow; this is the determinative of the ‘Ka’ or ‘Double’.  But
its relative position is different at top and bottom.  At the head of
the sarcophagus the top of the ‘Ka’ is turned towards the mouth of the
vase, but at the foot the extended arms point away from it.

“The symbolisation seems to mean that during the passing of the Sun
from West to East—from sunset to sunrise, or through the Under World,
otherwise night—the Heart, which is material even in the tomb and
cannot leave it, simply revolves, so that it can always rest on ‘Ra’
the Sun-God, the origin of all good; but that the Double, which
represents the active principle, goes whither it will, the same by
night as by day. If this be correct it is a warning—a caution—a
reminder that the consciousness of the mummy does not rest but is to be
reckoned with.

“Or it may be intended to convey that after the particular night of the
resurrection, the ‘Ka’ would leave the heart altogether, thus typifying
that in her resurrection the Queen would be restored to a lower and
purely physical existence.  In such case what would become of her
memory and the experiences of her wide-wandering soul?  The chiefest
value of her resurrection would be lost to the world!  This, however,
does not alarm me.  It is only guess-work after all, and is
contradictory to the intellectual belief of the Egyptian theology, that
the ‘Ka’ is an essential portion of humanity.”  He paused and we all
waited.  The silence was broken by Doctor Winchester:

“But would not all this imply that the Queen feared intrusion of her
tomb?”  Mr. Trelawny smiled as he answered:

“My dear sir, she was prepared for it.  The grave-robber is no modern
application of endeavour; he was probably known in the Queen’s own
dynasty.  Not only was she prepared for intrusion, but, as shown in
several ways, she expected it.  The hiding of the lamps in the serdab,
and the institution of the avenging ‘treasurer’ shows that there was
defence, positive as well as negative.  Indeed, from the many
indications afforded in the clues laid out with the most consummated
thought, we may almost gather that she entertained it as a possibility
that others—like ourselves, for instance—might in all seriousness
undertake the work which she had made ready for her own hands when the
time should have come.  This very matter that I have been speaking of
is an instance.  The clue is intended for seeing eyes!”

Again we were silent.  It was Margaret who spoke:

“Father, may I have that chart?  I should like to study it during the
day!”

“Certainly, my dear!” answered Mr. Trelawny heartily, as he handed it
to her.  He resumed his instructions in a different tone, a more
matter-of-fact one suitable to a practical theme which had no mystery
about it:

“I think you had better all understand the working of the electric
light in case any sudden contingency should arise.  I dare say you have
noticed that we have a complete supply in every part of the house, so
that there need not be a dark corner anywhere.  This I had specially
arranged.  It is worked by a set of turbines moved by the flowing and
ebbing tide, after the manner of the turbines at Niagara.  I hope by
this means to nullify accident and to have without fail a full supply
ready at any time. Come with me and I will explain the system of
circuits, and point out to you the taps and the fuses.”  I could not
but notice, as we went with him all over the house, how absolutely
complete the system was, and how he had guarded himself against any
disaster that human thought could foresee.

But out of the very completeness came a fear!  In such an enterprise as
ours the bounds of human thought were but narrow.  Beyond it lay the
vast of Divine wisdom, and Divine power!

When we came back to the cave, Mr. Trelawny took up another theme:

“We have now to settle definitely the exact hour at which the Great
Experiment is to be made.  So far as science and mechanism go, if the
preparations are complete, all hours are the same.  But as we have to
deal with preparations made by a woman of extraordinarily subtle mind,
and who had full belief in magic and had a cryptic meaning in
everything, we should place ourselves in her position before deciding.
It is now manifest that the sunset has an important place in the
arrangements.  As those suns, cut so mathematically by the edge of the
sarcophagus, were arranged of full design, we must take our cue from
this.  Again, we find all along that the number seven has had an
important bearing on every phase of the Queen’s thought and reasoning
and action.  The logical result is that the seventh hour after sunset
was the time fixed on.  This is borne out by the fact that on each of
the occasions when action was taken in my house, this was the time
chosen.  As the sun sets tonight in Cornwall at eight, our hour is to
be three in the morning!”  He spoke in a matter-of-fact way, though
with great gravity; but there was nothing of mystery in his word or
manner.  Still, we were all impressed to a remarkable degree.  I could
see this in the other men by the pallor that came on some of their
faces, and by the stillness and unquestioning silence with which the
decision was received.  The only one who remained in any way at ease
was Margaret, who had lapsed into one of her moods of abstraction, but
who seemed to wake up to a note of gladness.  Her father, who was
watching her intently, smiled; her mood was to him a direct
confirmation of his theory.

For myself I was almost overcome.  The definite fixing of the hour
seemed like the voice of Doom.  When I think of it now, I can realise
how a condemned man feels at his sentence, or at the sounding of the
last hour he is to hear.

There could be no going back now!  We were in the hands of God!

The hands of God...!  And yet...!  What other forces were arrayed? ...
What would become of us all, poor atoms of earthly dust whirled in the
wind which cometh whence and goeth whither no man may know.  It was not
for myself.... Margaret...!

I was recalled by Mr. Trelawny’s firm voice:

“Now we shall see to the lamps and finish our preparations.”
Accordingly we set to work, and under his supervision made ready the
Egyptian lamps, seeing that they were well filled with the cedar oil,
and that the wicks were adjusted and in good order.  We lighted and
tested them one by one, and left them ready so that they would light at
once and evenly.  When this was done we had a general look round; and
fixed all in readiness for our work at night.

All this had taken time, and we were I think all surprised when as we
emerged from the cave we heard the great clock in the hall chime four.

We had a late lunch, a thing possible without trouble in the present
state of our commissariat arrangements.  After it, by Mr. Trelawny’s
advice, we separated; each to prepare in our own way for the strain of
the coming night.  Margaret looked pale and somewhat overwrought, so I
advised her to lie down and try to sleep.  She promised that she would.
The abstraction which had been upon her fitfully all day lifted for the
time; with all her old sweetness and loving delicacy she kissed me
good-bye for the present!  With the sense of happiness which this gave
me I went out for a walk on the cliffs.  I did not want to think; and I
had an instinctive feeling that fresh air and God’s sunlight, and the
myriad beauties of the works of His hand would be the best preparation
of fortitude for what was to come.

When I got back, all the party were assembling for a late tea.  Coming
fresh from the exhilaration of nature, it struck me as almost comic
that we, who were nearing the end of so strange—almost monstrous—an
undertaking, should be yet bound by the needs and habits of our lives.

All the men of the party were grave; the time of seclusion, even if it
had given them rest, had also given opportunity for thought.  Margaret
was bright, almost buoyant; but I missed about her something of her
usual spontaneity.  Towards myself there was a shadowy air of reserve,
which brought back something of my suspicion.  When tea was over, she
went out of the room; but returned in a minute with the roll of drawing
which she had taken with her earlier in the day.  Coming close to Mr.
Trelawny, she said:

“Father, I have been carefully considering what you said today about
the hidden meaning of those suns and hearts and ‘Ka’s’, and I have been
examining the drawings again.”

“And with what result, my child?” asked Mr. Trelawny eagerly.

“There is another reading possible!”

“And that?”  His voice was now tremulous with anxiety.  Margaret spoke
with a strange ring in her voice; a ring that cannot be, unless there
is the consciousness of truth behind it:

“It means that at the sunset the ‘Ka’ is to enter the ‘Ab’; and it is
only at the sunrise that it will leave it!”

“Go on!” said her father hoarsely.

“It means that for this night the Queen’s Double, which is otherwise
free, will remain in her heart, which is mortal and cannot leave its
prison-place in the mummy-shrouding.  It means that when the sun has
dropped into the sea, Queen Tera will cease to exist as a conscious
power, till sunrise; unless the Great Experiment can recall her to
waking life.  It means that there will be nothing whatever for you or
others to fear from her in such way as we have all cause to remember.
Whatever change may come from the working of the Great Experiment,
there can come none from the poor, helpless, dead woman who has waited
all those centuries for this night; who has given up to the coming hour
all the freedom of eternity, won in the old way, in hope of a new life
in a new world such as she longed for...!”  She stopped suddenly.  As
she had gone on speaking there had come with her words a strange
pathetic, almost pleading, tone which touched me to the quick.  As she
stopped, I could see, before she turned away her head, that her eyes
were full of tears.

For once the heart of her father did not respond to her feeling.  He
looked exultant, but with a grim masterfulness which reminded me of the
set look of his stern face as he had lain in the trance.  He did not
offer any consolation to his daughter in her sympathetic pain.  He only
said:

“We may test the accuracy of your surmise, and of her feeling, when the
time comes!” Having said so, he went up the stone stairway and into his
own room.  Margaret’s face had a troubled look as she gazed after him.

Strangely enough her trouble did not as usual touch me to the quick.

When Mr. Trelawny had gone, silence reigned.  I do not think that any
of us wanted to talk.  Presently Margaret went to her room, and I went
out on the terrace over the sea.  The fresh air and the beauty of all
before helped to restore the good spirits which I had known earlier in
the day. Presently I felt myself actually rejoicing in the belief that
the danger which I had feared from the Queen’s violence on the coming
night was obviated.  I believed in Margaret’s belief so thoroughly that
it did not occur to me to dispute her reasoning.  In a lofty frame of
mind, and with less anxiety than I had felt for days, I went to my room
and lay down on the sofa.

I was awaked by Corbeck calling to me, hurriedly:

“Come down to the cave as quickly as you can.  Mr. Trelawny wants to
see us all there at once.  Hurry!”

I jumped up and ran down to the cave.  All were there except Margaret,
who came immediately after me carrying Silvio in her arms.  When the
cat saw his old enemy he struggled to get down; but Margaret held him
fast and soothed him.  I looked at my watch.  It was close to eight.

When Margaret was with us her father said directly, with a quiet
insistence which was new to me:

“You believe, Margaret, that Queen Tera has voluntarily undertaken to
give up her freedom for this night?  To become a mummy and nothing
more, till the Experiment has been completed?  To be content that she
shall be powerless under all and any circumstances until after all is
over and the act of resurrection has been accomplished, or the effort
has failed?”  After a pause Margaret answered in a low voice:

“Yes!”

In the pause her whole being, appearance, expression, voice, manner had
changed. Even Silvio noticed it, and with a violent effort wriggled
away from her arms; she did not seem to notice the act.  I expected
that the cat, when he had achieved his freedom, would have attacked the
mummy; but on this occasion he did not.  He seemed too cowed to
approach it. He shrunk away, and with a piteous “miaou” came over and
rubbed himself against my ankles.  I took him up in my arms, and he
nestled there content.  Mr. Trelawny spoke again:

“You are sure of what you say!  You believe it with all your soul?”
Margaret’s face had lost the abstracted look; it now seemed illuminated
with the devotion of one to whom is given to speak of great things.
She answered in a voice which, though quiet, vibrated with conviction:

“I know it!  My knowledge is beyond belief!”  Mr. Trelawny spoke again:

“Then you are so sure, that were you Queen Tera herself, you would be
willing to prove it in any way that I might suggest?”

“Yes, any way!” the answer rang out fearlessly.  He spoke again, in a
voice in which was no note of doubt:

“Even in the abandonment of your Familiar to death—to annihilation.”

She paused, and I could see that she suffered—suffered horribly.
There was in her eyes a hunted look, which no man can, unmoved, see in
the eyes of his beloved.  I was about to interrupt, when her father’s
eyes, glancing round with a fierce determination, met mine.  I stood
silent, almost spellbound; so also the other men. Something was going
on before us which we did not understand!

With a few long strides Mr. Trelawny went to the west side of the cave
and tore back the shutter which obscured the window.  The cool air blew
in, and the sunlight streamed over them both, for Margaret was now by
his side.  He pointed to where the sun was sinking into the sea in a
halo of golden fire, and his face was as set as flint.  In a voice
whose absolute uncompromising hardness I shall hear in my ears at times
till my dying day, he said:

“Choose!  Speak!  When the sun has dipped below the sea, it will be too
late!”  The glory of the dying sun seemed to light up Margaret’s face,
till it shone as if lit from within by a noble light, as she answered:

“Even that!”

Then stepping over to where the mummy cat stood on the little table,
she placed her hand on it.  She had now left the sunlight, and the
shadows looked dark and deep over her.  In a clear voice she said:

“Were I Tera, I would say ‘Take all I have!  This night is for the Gods
alone!’”

As she spoke the sun dipped, and the cold shadow suddenly fell on us.
We all stood still for a while.  Silvio jumped from my arms and ran
over to his mistress, rearing himself up against her dress as if asking
to be lifted.  He took no notice whatever of the mummy now.

Margaret was glorious with all her wonted sweetness as she said sadly:

“The sun is down, Father!  Shall any of us see it again?  The night of
nights is come!”




Chapter XIX

The Great Experiment


If any evidence had been wanted of how absolutely one and all of us had
come to believe in the spiritual existence of the Egyptian Queen, it
would have been found in the change which in a few minutes had been
effected in us by the statement of voluntary negation made, we all
believed, through Margaret.  Despite the coming of the fearful ordeal,
the sense of which it was impossible to forget, we looked and acted as
though a great relief had come to us.  We had indeed lived in such a
state of terrorism during the days when Mr. Trelawny was lying in a
trance that the feeling had bitten deeply into us.  No one knows till
he has experienced it, what it is to be in constant dread of some
unknown danger which may come at any time and in any form.

The change was manifested in different ways, according to each nature.
Margaret was sad.  Doctor Winchester was in high spirits, and keenly
observant; the process of thought which had served as an antidote to
fear, being now relieved from this duty, added to his intellectual
enthusiasm.  Mr. Corbeck seemed to be in a retrospective rather than a
speculative mood.  I was myself rather inclined to be gay; the relief
from certain anxiety regarding Margaret was sufficient for me for the
time.

As to Mr. Trelawny he seemed less changed than any.  Perhaps this was
only natural, as he had had in his mind the intention for so many years
of doing that in which we were tonight engaged, that any event
connected with it could only seem to him as an episode, a step to the
end.  His was that commanding nature which looks so to the end of an
undertaking that all else is of secondary importance.  Even now, though
his terrible sternness relaxed under the relief from the strain, he
never flagged nor faltered for a moment in his purpose.  He asked us
men to come with him; and going to the hall we presently managed to
lower into the cave an oak table, fairly long and not too wide, which
stood against the wall in the hall.  This we placed under the strong
cluster of electric lights in the middle of the cave.  Margaret looked
on for a while; then all at once her face blanched, and in an agitated
voice she said:

“What are you going to do, Father?”

“To unroll the mummy of the cat!  Queen Tera will not need her Familiar
tonight.  If she should want him, it might be dangerous to us; so we
shall make him safe.  You are not alarmed, dear?”

“Oh no!” she answered quickly.  “But I was thinking of my Silvio, and
how I should feel if he had been the mummy that was to be unswathed!”

Mr. Trelawny got knives and scissors ready, and placed the cat on the
table.  It was a grim beginning to our work; and it made my heart sink
when I thought of what might happen in that lonely house in the
mid-gloom of the night.  The sense of loneliness and isolation from the
world was increased by the moaning of the wind which had now risen
ominously, and by the beating of waves on the rocks below.  But we had
too grave a task before us to be swayed by external manifestations:
the unrolling of the mummy began.

There was an incredible number of bandages; and the tearing sound—they
being stuck fast to each other by bitumen and gums and spices—and the
little cloud of red pungent dust that arose, pressed on the senses of
all of us.  As the last wrappings came away, we saw the animal seated
before us.  He was all hunkered up; his hair and teeth and claws were
complete.  The eyes were closed, but the eyelids had not the fierce
look which I expected.  The whiskers had been pressed down on the side
of the face by the bandaging; but when the pressure was taken away they
stood out, just as they would have done in life.  He was a magnificent
creature, a tiger-cat of great size.  But as we looked at him, our
first glance of admiration changed to one of fear, and a shudder ran
through each one of us; for here was a confirmation of the fears which
we had endured.

His mouth and his claws were smeared with the dry, red stains of recent
blood!

Doctor Winchester was the first to recover; blood in itself had small
disturbing quality for him.  He had taken out his magnifying-glass and
was examining the stains on the cat’s mouth.  Mr. Trelawny breathed
loudly, as though a strain had been taken from him.

“It is as I expected,” he said.  “This promises well for what is to
follow.”

By this time Doctor Winchester was looking at the red stained paws.
“As I expected!” he said.  “He has seven claws, too!”  Opening his
pocket-book, he took out the piece of blotting-paper marked by Silvio’s
claws, on which was also marked in pencil a diagram of the cuts made on
Mr. Trelawny’s wrist.  He placed the paper under the mummy cat’s paw.
The marks fitted exactly.

When we had carefully examined the cat, finding, however, nothing
strange about it but its wonderful preservation, Mr. Trelawny lifted it
from the table.  Margaret started forward, crying out:

“Take care, Father!  Take care!  He may injure you!”

“Not now, my dear!” he answered as he moved towards the stairway.  Her
face fell. “Where are you going?” she asked in a faint voice.

“To the kitchen,” he answered.  “Fire will take away all danger for the
future; even an astral body cannot materialise from ashes!”  He signed
to us to follow him.  Margaret turned away with a sob.  I went to her;
but she motioned me back and whispered:

“No, no!  Go with the others.  Father may want you.  Oh! it seems like
murder!  The poor Queen’s pet...!”  The tears were dropping from under
the fingers that covered her eyes.

In the kitchen was a fire of wood ready laid.  To this Mr. Trelawny
applied a match; in a few seconds the kindling had caught and the
flames leaped.  When the fire was solidly ablaze, he threw the body of
the cat into it.  For a few seconds it lay a dark mass amidst the
flames, and the room was rank with the smell of burning hair.  Then the
dry body caught fire too.  The inflammable substances used in embalming
became new fuel, and the flames roared.  A few minutes of fierce
conflagration; and then we breathed freely.  Queen Tera’s Familiar was
no more!

When we went back to the cave we found Margaret sitting in the dark.
She had switched off the electric light, and only a faint glow of the
evening light came through the narrow openings.  Her father went
quickly over to her and put his arms round her in a loving protective
way.  She laid her head on his shoulder for a minute and seemed
comforted. Presently she called to me:

“Malcolm, turn up the light!”  I carried out her orders, and could see
that, though she had been crying, her eyes were now dry.  Her father
saw it too and looked glad.  He said to us in a grave tone:

“Now we had better prepare for our great work.  It will not do to leave
anything to the last!”  Margaret must have had a suspicion of what was
coming, for it was with a sinking voice that she asked:

“What are you going to do now?”  Mr. Trelawny too must have had a
suspicion of her feelings, for he answered in a low tone:

“To unroll the mummy of Queen Tera!”  She came close to him and said
pleadingly in a whisper:

“Father, you are not going to unswathe her!  All you men...!  And in
the glare of light!”

“But why not, my dear?”

“Just think, Father, a woman!  All alone!  In such a way!  In such a
place!  Oh! it’s cruel, cruel!”  She was manifestly much overcome.  Her
cheeks were flaming red, and her eyes were full of indignant tears.
Her father saw her distress; and, sympathising with it, began to
comfort her.  I was moving off; but he signed to me to stay.  I took it
that after the usual manner of men he wanted help on such an occasion,
and man-like wished to throw on someone else the task of dealing with a
woman in indignant distress.  However, he began to appeal first to her
reason:

“Not a woman, dear; a mummy!  She has been dead nearly five thousand
years!”

“What does that matter?  Sex is not a matter of years!  A woman is a
woman, if she had been dead five thousand centuries!  And you expect
her to arise out of that long sleep!  It could not be real death, if
she is to rise out of it!  You have led me to believe that she will
come alive when the Coffer is opened!”

“I did, my dear; and I believe it!  But if it isn’t death that has been
the matter with her all these years, it is something uncommonly like
it. Then again, just think; it was men who embalmed her.  They didn’t
have women’s rights or lady doctors in ancient Egypt, my dear!  And
besides,” he went on more freely, seeing that she was accepting his
argument, if not yielding to it, “we men are accustomed to such things.
Corbeck and I have unrolled a hundred mummies; and there were as many
women as men amongst them.  Doctor Winchester in his work has had to
deal with women as well of men, till custom has made him think nothing
of sex.  Even Ross has in his work as a barrister...”  He stopped
suddenly.

“You were going to help too!” she said to me, with an indignant look.

I said nothing; I thought silence was best.  Mr. Trelawny went on
hurriedly; I could see that he was glad of interruption, for the part
of his argument concerning a barrister’s work was becoming decidedly
weak:

“My child, you will be with us yourself.  Would we do anything which
would hurt or offend you?  Come now! be reasonable!  We are not at a
pleasure party.  We are all grave men, entering gravely on an
experiment which may unfold the wisdom of old times, and enlarge human
knowledge indefinitely; which may put the minds of men on new tracks of
thought and research.  An experiment,” as he went on his voice
deepened, “which may be fraught with death to any one of us—to us all!
We know from what has been, that there are, or may be, vast and unknown
dangers ahead of us, of which none in the house today may ever see the
end.  Take it, my child, that we are not acting lightly; but with all
the gravity of deeply earnest men!  Besides, my dear, whatever feelings
you or any of us may have on the subject, it is necessary for the
success of the experiment to unswathe her.  I think that under any
circumstances it would be necessary to remove the wrappings before she
became again a live human being instead of a spiritualised corpse with
an astral body. Were her original intention carried out, and did she
come to new life within her mummy wrappings, it might be to exchange a
coffin for a grave!  She would die the death of the buried alive!  But
now, when she has voluntarily abandoned for the time her astral power,
there can be no doubt on the subject.”

Margaret’s face cleared.  “All right, Father!” she said as she kissed
him.  “But oh! it seems a horrible indignity to a Queen, and a woman.”

I was moving away to the staircase when she called me:

“Where are you going?”  I came back and took her hand and stroked it as
I answered:

“I shall come back when the unrolling is over!”  She looked at me long,
and a faint suggestion of a smile came over her face as she said:

“Perhaps you had better stay, too!  It may be useful to you in your
work as a barrister!”  She smiled out as she met my eyes:  but in an
instant she changed.  Her face grew grave, and deadly white.  In a far
away voice she said:

“Father is right!  It is a terrible occasion; we need all to be serious
over it.  But all the same—nay, for that very reason you had better
stay, Malcolm!  You may be glad, later on, that you were present
tonight!”

My heart sank down, down, at her words; but I thought it better to say
nothing.  Fear was stalking openly enough amongst us already!

By this time Mr. Trelawny, assisted by Mr. Corbeck and Doctor
Winchester, had raised the lid of the ironstone sarcophagus which
contained the mummy of the Queen.  It was a large one; but it was none
too big.  The mummy was both long and broad and high; and was of such
weight that it was no easy task, even for the four of us, to lift it
out.  Under Mr. Trelawny’s direction we laid it out on the table
prepared for it.

Then, and then only, did the full horror of the whole thing burst upon
me!  There, in the full glare of the light, the whole material and
sordid side of death seemed staringly real.  The outer wrappings, torn
and loosened by rude touch, and with the colour either darkened by dust
or worn light by friction, seemed creased as by rough treatment; the
jagged edges of the wrapping-cloths looked fringed; the painting was
patchy, and the varnish chipped.  The coverings were evidently many,
for the bulk was great.  But through all, showed that unhidable human
figure, which seems to look more horrible when partially concealed than
at any other time.  What was before us was Death, and nothing else.
All the romance and sentiment of fancy had disappeared.  The two elder
men, enthusiasts who had often done such work, were not disconcerted;
and Doctor Winchester seemed to hold himself in a business-like
attitude, as if before the operating-table.  But I felt low-spirited,
and miserable, and ashamed; and besides I was pained and alarmed by
Margaret’s ghastly pallor.

Then the work began.  The unrolling of the mummy cat had prepared me
somewhat for it; but this was so much larger, and so infinitely more
elaborate, that it seemed a different thing.  Moreover, in addition to
the ever present sense of death and humanity, there was a feeling of
something finer in all this.  The cat had been embalmed with coarser
materials; here, all, when once the outer coverings were removed, was
more delicately done.  It seemed as if only the finest gums and spices
had been used in this embalming.  But there were the same surroundings,
the same attendant red dust and pungent presence of bitumen; there was
the same sound of rending which marked the tearing away of the
bandages. There were an enormous number of these, and their bulk when
opened was great.  As the men unrolled them, I grew more and more
excited.  I did not take a part in it myself; Margaret had looked at me
gratefully as I drew back.  We clasped hands, and held each other hard.
As the unrolling went on, the wrappings became finer, and the smell
less laden with bitumen, but more pungent.  We all, I think, began to
feel it as though it caught or touched us in some special way.  This,
however, did not interfere with the work; it went on uninterruptedly.
Some of the inner wrappings bore symbols or pictures. These were done
sometimes wholly in pale green colour, sometimes in many colours; but
always with a prevalence of green.  Now and again Mr. Trelawny or Mr.
Corbeck would point out some special drawing before laying the bandage
on the pile behind them, which kept growing to a monstrous height.

At last we knew that the wrappings were coming to an end.  Already the
proportions were reduced to those of a normal figure of the manifest
height of the Queen, who was more than average height.  And as the end
drew nearer, so Margaret’s pallor grew; and her heart beat more and
more wildly, till her breast heaved in a way that frightened me.

Just as her father was taking away the last of the bandages, he
happened to look up and caught the pained and anxious look of her pale
face.  He paused, and taking her concern to be as to the outrage on
modesty, said in a comforting way:

“Do not be uneasy, dear!  See! there is nothing to harm you.  The Queen
has on a robe.—Ay, and a royal robe, too!”

The wrapping was a wide piece the whole length of the body.  It being
removed, a profusely full robe of white linen had appeared, covering
the body from the throat to the feet.

And such linen!  We all bent over to look at it.

Margaret lost her concern, in her woman’s interest in fine stuff.  Then
the rest of us looked with admiration; for surely such linen was never
seen by the eyes of our age. It was as fine as the finest silk.  But
never was spun or woven silk which lay in such gracious folds,
constrict though they were by the close wrappings of the mummy cloth,
and fixed into hardness by the passing of thousands of years.

Round the neck it was delicately embroidered in pure gold with tiny
sprays of sycamore; and round the feet, similarly worked, was an
endless line of lotus plants of unequal height, and with all the
graceful abandon of natural growth.

Across the body, but manifestly not surrounding it, was a girdle of
jewels.  A wondrous girdle, which shone and glowed with all the forms
and phases and colours of the sky!

The buckle was a great yellow stone, round of outline, deep and curved,
as if a yielding globe had been pressed down.  It shone and glowed, as
though a veritable sun lay within; the rays of its light seemed to
strike out and illumine all round. Flanking it were two great
moonstones of lesser size, whose glowing, beside the glory of the
sunstone, was like the silvery sheen of moonlight.

And then on either side, linked by golden clasps of exquisite shape,
was a line of flaming jewels, of which the colours seemed to glow.
Each of these stones seemed to hold a living star, which twinkled in
every phase of changing light.

Margaret raised her hands in ecstasy.  She bent over to examine more
closely; but suddenly drew back and stood fully erect at her grand
height.  She seemed to speak with the conviction of absolute knowledge
as she said:

“That is no cerement!  It was not meant for the clothing of death!  It
is a marriage robe!”

Mr. Trelawny leaned over and touched the linen robe.  He lifted a fold
at the neck, and I knew from the quick intake of his breath that
something had surprised him. He lifted yet a little more; and then he,
too, stood back and pointed, saying:

“Margaret is right!  That dress is not intended to be worn by the dead!
See! her figure is not robed in it.  It is but laid upon her.”  He
lifted the zone of jewels and handed it to Margaret.  Then with both
hands he raised the ample robe, and laid it across the arms which she
extended in a natural impulse.  Things of such beauty were too precious
to be handled with any but the greatest care.

We all stood awed at the beauty of the figure which, save for the face
cloth, now lay completely nude before us.  Mr. Trelawny bent over, and
with hands that trembled slightly, raised this linen cloth which was of
the same fineness as the robe.  As he stood back and the whole glorious
beauty of the Queen was revealed, I felt a rush of shame sweep over me.
It was not right that we should be there, gazing with irreverent eyes
on such unclad beauty:  it was indecent; it was almost sacrilegious!
And yet the white wonder of that beautiful form was something to dream
of. It was not like death at all; it was like a statue carven in ivory
by the hand of a Praxiteles. There was nothing of that horrible
shrinkage which death seems to effect in a moment.  There was none of
the wrinkled toughness which seems to be a leading characteristic of
most mummies. There was not the shrunken attenuation of a body dried in
the sand, as I had seen before in museums.  All the pores of the body
seemed to have been preserved in some wonderful way.  The flesh was
full and round, as in a living person; and the skin was as smooth as
satin.  The colour seemed extraordinary.  It was like ivory, new ivory;
except where the right arm, with shattered, blood-stained wrist and
missing hand had lain bare to exposure in the sarcophagus for so many
tens of centuries.

With a womanly impulse; with a mouth that drooped with pity, with eyes
that flashed with anger, and cheeks that flamed, Margaret threw over
the body the beautiful robe which lay across her arm.  Only the face
was then to be seen.  This was more startling even than the body, for
it seemed not dead, but alive.  The eyelids were closed; but the long,
black, curling lashes lay over on the cheeks.  The nostrils, set in
grave pride, seemed to have the repose which, when it is seen in life,
is greater than the repose of death.  The full, red lips, though the
mouth was not open, showed the tiniest white line of pearly teeth
within.  Her hair, glorious in quantity and glossy black as the raven’s
wing, was piled in great masses over the white forehead, on which a few
curling tresses strayed like tendrils.  I was amazed at the likeness to
Margaret, though I had had my mind prepared for this by Mr. Corbeck’s
quotation of her father’s statement.  This woman—I could not think of
her as a mummy or a corpse—was the image of Margaret as my eyes had
first lit on her.  The likeness was increased by the jewelled ornament
which she wore in her hair, the “Disk and Plumes”, such as Margaret,
too, had worn.  It, too, was a glorious jewel; one noble pearl of
moonlight lustre, flanked by carven pieces of moonstone.

Mr. Trelawny was overcome as he looked.  He quite broke down; and when
Margaret flew to him and held him close in her arms and comforted him,
I heard him murmur brokenly:

“It looks as if you were dead, my child!”

There was a long silence.  I could hear without the roar of the wind,
which was now risen to a tempest, and the furious dashing of the waves
far below.  Mr. Trelawny’s voice broke the spell:

“Later on we must try and find out the process of embalming.  It is not
like any that I know.  There does not seem to have been any opening cut
for the withdrawing of the viscera and organs, which apparently remain
intact within the body.  Then, again, there is no moisture in the
flesh; but its place is supplied with something else, as though wax or
stearine had been conveyed into the veins by some subtle process.  I
wonder could it be possible that at that time they could have used
paraffin.  It might have been, by some process that we know not, pumped
into the veins, where it hardened!”

Margaret, having thrown a white sheet over the Queen’s body, asked us
to bring it to her own room, where we laid it on her bed.  Then she
sent us away, saying:

“Leave her alone with me.  There are still many hours to pass, and I do
not like to leave her lying there, all stark in the glare of light.
This may be the Bridal she prepared for—the Bridal of Death; and at
least she shall wear her pretty robes.”

When presently she brought me back to her room, the dead Queen was
dressed in the robe of fine linen with the embroidery of gold; and all
her beautiful jewels were in place.  Candles were lit around her, and
white flowers lay upon her breast.

Hand in hand we stood looking at her for a while.  Then with a sigh,
Margaret covered her with one of her own snowy sheets.  She turned
away; and after softly closing the door of the room, went back with me
to the others who had now come into the dining-room.  Here we all began
to talk over the things that had been, and that were to be.

Now and again I could feel that one or other of us was forcing
conversation, as if we were not sure of ourselves.  The long wait was
beginning to tell on our nerves.  It was apparent to me that Mr.
Trelawny had suffered in that strange trance more than we suspected, or
than he cared to show.  True, his will and his determination were as
strong as ever; but the purely physical side of him had been weakened
somewhat.  It was indeed only natural that it should be.  No man can go
through a period of four days of absolute negation of life without
being weakened by it somehow.

As the hours crept by, the time passed more and more slowly.  The other
men seemed to get unconsciously a little drowsy.  I wondered if in the
case of Mr. Trelawny and Mr. Corbeck, who had already been under the
hypnotic influence of the Queen, the same dormancy was manifesting
itself.  Doctor Winchester had periods of distraction which grew longer
and more frequent as the time wore on.

As to Margaret, the suspense told on her exceedingly, as might have
been expected in the case of a woman.  She grew paler and paler still;
till at last about midnight, I began to be seriously alarmed about her.
I got her to come into the library with me, and tried to make her lie
down on a sofa for a little while.  As Mr. Trelawny had decided that
the experiment was to be made exactly at the seventh hour after sunset,
it would be as nearly as possible three o’clock in the morning when the
great trial should be made.  Even allowing a whole hour for the final
preparations, we had still two hours of waiting to go through, and I
promised faithfully to watch her and to awake her at any time she might
name.  She would not hear of it, however.  She thanked me sweetly and
smiled at me as she did so; but she assured me that she was not sleepy,
and that she was quite able to bear up.  That it was only the suspense
and excitement of waiting that made her pale.  I agreed perforce; but I
kept her talking of many things in the library for more than an hour;
so that at last, when she insisted on going back to her father’s room I
felt that I had at least done something to help her pass the time.

We found the three men sitting patiently in silence.  With manlike
fortitude they were content to be still when they felt they had done
all in their power.  And so we waited.

The striking of two o’clock seemed to freshen us all up.  Whatever
shadows had been settling over us during the long hours preceding
seemed to lift at once; and we went about our separate duties alert and
with alacrity.  We looked first to the windows to see that they were
closed, and we got ready our respirators to put them on when the time
should be close at hand.  We had from the first arranged to use them
for we did not know whether some noxious fume might not come from the
magic coffer when it should be opened.  Somehow, it never seemed to
occur to any of us that there was any doubt as to its opening.

Then, under Margaret’s guidance, we carried the mummied body of Queen
Tera from her room into her father’s, and laid it on a couch.  We put
the sheet lightly over it, so that if she should wake she could at once
slip from under it.  The severed hand was placed in its true position
on her breast, and under it the Jewel of Seven Stars which Mr. Trelawny
had taken from the great safe.  It seemed to flash and blaze as he put
it in its place.

It was a strange sight, and a strange experience.  The group of grave
silent men carried the white still figure, which looked like an ivory
statue when through our moving the sheet fell back, away from the
lighted candles and the white flowers.  We placed it on the couch in
that other room, where the blaze of the electric lights shone on the
great sarcophagus fixed in the middle of the room ready for the final
experiment, the great experiment consequent on the researches during a
lifetime of these two travelled scholars.  Again, the startling
likeness between Margaret and the mummy, intensified by her own
extraordinary pallor, heightened the strangeness of it all.  When all
was finally fixed three-quarters of an hour had gone, for we were
deliberate in all our doings.  Margaret beckoned me, and I went out
with her to bring in Silvio.  He came to her purring.  She took him up
and handed him to me; and then did a thing which moved me strangely and
brought home to me keenly the desperate nature of the enterprise on
which we were embarked. One by one, she blew out the candles carefully
and placed them back in their usual places.  When she had finished she
said to me:

“They are done with now.  Whatever comes—life or death—there will be
no purpose in their using now.”  Then taking Silvio into her arms, and
pressing him close to her bosom where he purred loudly, we went back to
the room.  I closed the door carefully behind me, feeling as I did so a
strange thrill as of finality.  There was to be no going back now.
Then we put on our respirators, and took our places as had been
arranged.  I was to stand by the taps of the electric lights beside the
door, ready to turn them off or on as Mr. Trelawny should direct.
Doctor Winchester was to stand behind the couch so that he should not
be between the mummy and the sarcophagus; he was to watch carefully
what should take place with regard to the Queen.  Margaret was to be
beside him; she held Silvio ready to place him upon the couch or beside
it when she might think right.  Mr. Trelawny and Mr. Corbeck were to
attend to the lighting of the lamps.  When the hands of the clock were
close to the hour, they stood ready with their linstocks.

The striking of the silver bell of the clock seemed to smite on our
hearts like a knell of doom.  One!  Two!  Three!

Before the third stroke the wicks of the lamps had caught, and I had
turned out the electric light.  In the dimness of the struggling lamps,
and after the bright glow of the electric light, the room and all
within it took weird shapes, and all seemed in an instant to change.
We waited with our hearts beating.  I know mine did, and I fancied I
could hear the pulsation of the others.

The seconds seemed to pass with leaden wings.  It were as though all
the world were standing still.  The figures of the others stood out
dimly, Margaret’s white dress alone showing clearly in the gloom.  The
thick respirators which we all wore added to the strange appearance.
The thin light of the lamps showed Mr. Trelawny’s square jaw and strong
mouth and the brown shaven face of Mr. Corbeck.  Their eyes seemed to
glare in the light.  Across the room Doctor Winchester’s eyes twinkled
like stars, and Margaret’s blazed like black suns.  Silvio’s eyes were
like emeralds.

Would the lamps never burn up!

It was only a few seconds in all till they did blaze up.  A slow,
steady light, growing more and more bright, and changing in colour from
blue to crystal white.  So they stayed for a couple of minutes without
change in the coffer; till at last there began to appear all over it a
delicate glow.  This grew and grew, till it became like a blazing
jewel, and then like a living thing whose essence of life was light.
We waited and waited, our hearts seeming to stand still.

All at once there was a sound like a tiny muffled explosion and the
cover lifted right up on a level plane a few inches; there was no
mistaking anything now, for the whole room was full of a blaze of
light. Then the cover, staying fast at one side rose slowly up on the
other, as though yielding to some pressure of balance.  The coffer
still continued to glow; from it began to steal a faint greenish smoke.
I could not smell it fully on account of the respirator; but, even
through that, I was conscious of a strange pungent odour.  Then this
smoke began to grow thicker, and to roll out in volumes of ever
increasing density till the whole room began to get obscure.  I had a
terrible desire to rush over to Margaret, whom I saw through the smoke
still standing erect behind the couch.  Then, as I looked, I saw Doctor
Winchester sink down.  He was not unconscious; for he waved his hand
back and forward, as though to forbid any one to come to him.  At this
time the figures of Mr. Trelawny and Mr. Corbeck were becoming
indistinct in the smoke which rolled round them in thick billowy
clouds.  Finally I lost sight of them altogether.  The coffer still
continued to glow; but the lamps began to grow dim.  At first I thought
that their light was being overpowered by the thick black smoke; but
presently I saw that they were, one by one, burning out.  They must
have burned quickly to produce such fierce and vivid flames.

I waited and waited, expecting every instant to hear the command to
turn up the light; but none came.  I waited still, and looked with
harrowing intensity at the rolling billows of smoke still pouring out
of the glowing casket, whilst the lamps sank down and went out one by
one.

Finally there was but one lamp alight, and that was dimly blue and
flickering.  The only effective light in the room was from the glowing
casket.  I kept my eyes fixed toward Margaret; it was for her now that
all my anxiety was claimed.  I could just see her white frock beyond
the still white shrouded figure on the couch.  Silvio was troubled; his
piteous mewing was the only sound in the room.  Deeper and denser grew
the black mist and its pungency began to assail my nostrils as well as
my eyes. Now the volume of smoke coming from the coffer seemed to
lessen, and the smoke itself to be less dense.  Across the room I saw
something white move where the couch was.  There were several
movements. I could just catch the quick glint of white through the
dense smoke in the fading light; for now the glow of the coffer began
quickly to subside.  I could still hear Silvio, but his mewing came
from close under; a moment later I could feel him piteously crouching
on my foot.

Then the last spark of light disappeared, and through the Egyptian
darkness I could see the faint line of white around the window blinds.
I felt that the time had come to speak; so I pulled off my respirator
and called out:

“Shall I turn up the light?”  There was no answer; so before the thick
smoke choked me, I called again but more loudly:

“Mr. Trelawny, shall I turn up the light?”  He did not answer; but from
across the room I heard Margaret’s voice, sounding as sweet and clear
as a bell:

“Yes, Malcolm!”  I turned the tap and the lamps flashed out.  But they
were only dim points of light in the midst of that murky ball of smoke.
In that thick atmosphere there was little possibility of illumination.
I ran across to Margaret, guided by her white dress, and caught hold of
her and held her hand.  She recognised my anxiety and said at once:

“I am all right.”

“Thank God!” I said.  “How are the others?  Quick, let us open all the
windows and get rid of this smoke!”  To my surprise, she answered in a
sleepy way:

“They will be all right.  They won’t get any harm.”  I did not stop to
inquire how or on what ground she formed such an opinion, but threw up
the lower sashes of all the windows, and pulled down the upper.  Then I
threw open the door.

A few seconds made a perceptible change as the thick, black smoke began
to roll out of the windows.  Then the lights began to grow into
strength and I could see the room.  All the men were overcome.  Beside
the couch Doctor Winchester lay on his back as though he had sunk down
and rolled over; and on the farther side of the sarcophagus, where they
had stood, lay Mr. Trelawny and Mr. Corbeck.  It was a relief to me to
see that, though they were unconscious, all three were breathing
heavily as though in a stupor.  Margaret still stood behind the couch.
She seemed at first to be in a partially dazed condition; but every
instant appeared to get more command of herself.  She stepped forward
and helped me to raise her father and drag him close to a window.
Together we placed the others similarly, and she flew down to the
dining-room and returned with a decanter of brandy.  This we proceeded
to administer to them all in turn.  It was not many minutes after we
had opened the windows when all three were struggling back to
consciousness.  During this time my entire thoughts and efforts had
been concentrated on their restoration; but now that this strain was
off, I looked round the room to see what had been the effect of the
experiment.  The thick smoke had nearly cleared away; but the room was
still misty and was full of a strange pungent acrid odour.

The great sarcophagus was just as it had been.  The coffer was open,
and in it, scattered through certain divisions or partitions wrought in
its own substance, was a scattering of black ashes.  Over all,
sarcophagus, coffer and, indeed, all in the room, was a sort of black
film of greasy soot.  I went over to the couch.  The white sheet still
lay over part of it; but it had been thrown back, as might be when one
is stepping out of bed.

But there was no sign of Queen Tera!  I took Margaret by the hand and
led her over. She reluctantly left her father to whom she was
administering, but she came docilely enough.  I whispered to her as I
held her hand:

“What has become of the Queen?  Tell me!  You were close at hand, and
must have seen if anything happened!”  She answered me very softly:

“There was nothing that I could see.  Until the smoke grew too dense I
kept my eyes on the couch, but there was no change.  Then, when all
grew so dark that I could not see, I thought I heard a movement close
to me. It might have been Doctor Winchester who had sunk down overcome;
but I could not be sure.  I thought that it might be the Queen waking,
so I put down poor Silvio.  I did not see what became of him; but I
felt as if he had deserted me when I heard him mewing over by the door.
I hope he is not offended with me!”  As if in answer, Silvio came
running into the room and reared himself against her dress, pulling it
as though clamouring to be taken up. She stooped down and took him up
and began to pet and comfort him.

I went over and examined the couch and all around it most carefully.
When Mr. Trelawny and Mr. Corbeck recovered sufficiently, which they
did quickly, though Doctor Winchester took longer to come round, we
went over it afresh.  But all we could find was a sort of ridge of
impalpable dust, which gave out a strange dead odour.  On the couch lay
the jewel of the disk and plumes which the Queen had worn in her hair,
and the Star Jewel which had words to command the Gods.

Other than this we never got clue to what had happened.  There was just
one thing which confirmed our idea of the physical annihilation of the
mummy.  In the sarcophagus in the hall, where we had placed the mummy
of the cat, was a small patch of similar dust.

*    *    *    *    *

In the autumn Margaret and I were married.  On the occasion she wore
the mummy robe and zone and the jewel which Queen Tera had worn in her
hair. On her breast, set in a ring of gold make like a twisted lotus
stalk, she wore the strange Jewel of Seven Stars which held words to
command the God of all the worlds.  At the marriage the sunlight
streaming through the chancel windows fell on it, and it seemed to glow
like a living thing.

The graven words may have been of efficacy; for Margaret holds to them,
and there is no other life in all the world so happy as my own.

We often think of the great Queen, and we talk of her freely.  Once,
when I said with a sigh that I was sorry she could not have waked into
a new life in a new world, my wife, putting both her hands in mine and
looking into my eyes with that far-away eloquent dreamy look which
sometimes comes into her own, said lovingly:

“Do not grieve for her!  Who knows, but she may have found the joy she
sought? Love and patience are all that make for happiness in this
world; or in the world of the past or of the future; of the living or
the dead. She dreamed her dream; and that is all that any of us can
ask!”


THE END






